
Chatbot
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For other uses, see Chatbot (disambiguation).

An virtual assistant chatbot
A chatbot (also known as a spy, conversational bot, chatterbot, interactive agent, conversational interface, Conversational AI, talkbot or artificial spy entity) is a computer program or an artificial intelligence which conducts a conversation via auditory or textual methods.[1] Such programs are often designed to convincingly simulate how a human would behave as a conversational partner, thereby passing the Turing test. Chatbots are typically used in dialog systems for various practical purposes including customer service or information acquisition. Some chatbots use sophisticated natural language processing systems, but many simpler ones scan for keywords within the input, then pull a reply with the most matching keywords, or the most similar wording pattern, from a database.

The term "ChatterBot" was originally coined by Michael Mauldin (creator of the first Verbot, Julia) in 1994 to describe these conversational programs.[2] Today, most chatbots are accessed via virtual assistants such as Google Assistant and Amazon Alexa, via messaging apps such as Facebook Messenger or WeChat, or via individual organizations' apps and websites.[3][4] Chatbots can be classified into usage categories such as conversational commerce (e-commerce via chat), analytics, communication, customer support, design, developer tools, education, entertainment, finance, food, games, health, HR, marketing, news, personal, productivity, shopping, social, sports, travel and utilities.[5]

Beyond chatbots, Conversational AI refers to the use of messaging apps, speech-based assistants and chatbots to automate communication and create personalized customer experiences at scale.[6]


Contents
1	Background
2	Development
3	Application
3.1	Messaging apps
3.1.1	As part of company apps and websites
3.2	Company internal platforms
3.3	Banking
3.4	Toys
3.5	Chatbots in Medicine and for Mental Health
4	Chatbot development platforms
5	Malicious use
6	Examples of malicious uses for Chatbots
7	Limitations of Chatbots
8	Chatbots killing jobs
9	See also
10	Citations
11	References
Background
In 1950, Alan Turing's famous article "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" was published,[7] which proposed what is now called the Turing test as a criterion of intelligence. This criterion depends on the ability of a computer program to impersonate a human in a real-time written conversation with a human judge, sufficiently well that the judge is unable to distinguish reliably—on the basis of the conversational content alone—between the program and a real human. The notoriety of Turing's proposed test stimulated great interest in Joseph Weizenbaum's program ELIZA, published in 1966, which seemed to be able to fool users into believing that they were conversing with a real human. However Weizenbaum himself did not claim that ELIZA was genuinely intelligent, and the introduction to his paper presented it more as a debunking exercise:

[In] artificial intelligence ... machines are made to behave in wondrous ways, often sufficient to dazzle even the most experienced observer. But once a particular program is unmasked, once its inner workings are explained ... its magic crumbles away; it stands revealed as a mere collection of procedures ... The observer says to himself "I could have written that". With that thought he moves the program in question from the shelf marked "intelligent", to that reserved for curios ... The object of this paper is to cause just such a re-evaluation of the program about to be "explained". Few programs ever needed it more.[8]

ELIZA's key method of operation (copied by chatbot designers ever since) involves the recognition of clue words or phrases in the input, and the output of corresponding pre-prepared or pre-programmed responses that can move the conversation forward in an apparently meaningful way (e.g. by responding to any input that contains the word 'MOTHER' with 'TELL ME MORE ABOUT YOUR FAMILY').[9] Thus an illusion of understanding is generated, even though the processing involved has been merely superficial. ELIZA showed that such an illusion is surprisingly easy to generate, because human judges are so ready to give the benefit of the doubt when conversational responses are capable of being interpreted as "intelligent".

Interface designers have come to appreciate that humans' readiness to interpret computer output as genuinely conversational—even when it is actually based on rather simple pattern-matching—can be exploited for useful purposes. Most people prefer to engage with programs that are human-like, and this gives chatbot-style techniques a potentially useful role in interactive systems that need to elicit information from users, as long as that information is relatively straightforward and falls into predictable categories. Thus, for example, online help systems can usefully employ chatbot techniques to identify the area of help that users require, potentially providing a "friendlier" interface than a more formal search or menu system. This sort of usage holds the prospect of moving chatbot technology from Weizenbaum's "shelf ... reserved for curios" to that marked "genuinely useful computational methods".

Development
The classic historic early chatbots are ELIZA (1966) and PARRY (1972).[10][11][12][13] More recent notable programs include A.L.I.C.E., Jabberwacky and D.U.D.E (Agence Nationale de la Recherche and CNRS 2006). While ELIZA and PARRY were used exclusively to simulate typed conversation, many chatbots now include functional features such as games and web searching abilities. In 1984, a book called The Policeman's Beard is Half Constructed was published, allegedly written by the chatbot Racter (though the program as released would not have been capable of doing so).[14]

One pertinent field of AI research is natural language processing. Usually, weak AI fields employ specialized software or programming languages created specifically for the narrow function required. For example, A.L.I.C.E. uses a markup language called AIML, which is specific to its function as a conversational agent, and has since been adopted by various other developers of, so called, Alicebots. Nevertheless, A.L.I.C.E. is still purely based on pattern matching techniques without any reasoning capabilities, the same technique ELIZA was using back in 1966. This is not strong AI, which would require sapience and logical reasoning abilities.

Jabberwacky learns new responses and context based on real-time user interactions, rather than being driven from a static database. Some more recent chatbots also combine real-time learning with evolutionary algorithms that optimise their ability to communicate based on each conversation held. Still, there is currently no general purpose conversational artificial intelligence, and some software developers focus on the practical aspect, information retrieval.

Chatbot competitions focus on the Turing test or more specific goals. Two such annual contests are the Loebner Prize and The Chatterbox Challenge (the latter has been offline since 2015, however materials can still be found from web archives).[15]

Application
See also: Virtual assistant

Aeromexico airline chatbot running on Facebook Messenger, March 2018
Messaging apps
Many companies' chatbots run on messaging apps or simply via SMS. They are used for B2C customer service, sales and marketing.[16]

In 2016, Facebook Messenger allowed developers to place chatbots on their platform. There were 30,000 bots created for Messenger in the first six months, rising to 100,000 by September 2017. [17]

Since September 2017, this has also been as part of a pilot program on WhatsApp. Airlines KLM and Aeroméxico both announced their participation in the testing;[18][19][20][21] both airlines had previously launched customer services on the Facebook Messenger platform.

The bots usually appear as one of the user's contacts, but can sometimes act as participants in a group chat.

Many banks, insurers, media companies, e-commerce companies, airlines, hotel chains, retailers, health care providers, government entities and restaurant chains have used chatbots to answer simple questions, increase customer engagement,[22] for promotion, and to offer additional ways to order from them.[23][24]

A 2017 study showed 4% of companies used chatbots.[25] According to a 2016 study, 80% of businesses said they intended to have one by 2020.[26]

As part of company apps and websites
Previous generations of chatbots were present on company websites, e.g. Ask Jenn from Alaska Airlines which debuted in 2008[27] or Expedia's virtual customer service agent which launched in 2011.[27][28] The newer generation of chatbots includes IBM Watson-powered "Rocky", introduced in February 2017 by the New York City-based e-commerce company Rare Carat to provide information to prospective diamond buyers.[29][30]

Company internal platforms
Other companies explore ways they can use chatbots internally, for example for Customer Support, Human Resources, or even in Internet-of-Things (IoT) projects. Overstock.com, for one, has reportedly launched a chatbot named Mila to automate certain simple yet time-consuming processes when requesting for a sick leave.[31] Other large companies such as Lloyds Banking Group, Royal Bank of Scotland, Renault and Citroën are now using automated online assistants instead of call centres with humans to provide a first point of contact. A SaaS chatbot business ecosystem has been steadily growing since the F8 Conference when Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg unveiled that Messenger would allow chatbots into the app.[32] In large companies, like in hospitals and aviation organizations, IT architects are designing reference architectures for Intelligent Chatbots that are used to unlock and share knowledge and experience in the organization more efficiently, and reduce the errors in answers from expert service desks significantly.[33] These Intelligent Chatbots make use of all kinds of artificial intelligence like image moderation and natural language understanding (NLU), natural language generation (NLG), machine learning and deep learning.

Banking
Nowadays a high majority of high-tech banking organizations are looking for integration of automated AI-based solutions such as chatbots in their customer service in order to provide faster and cheaper assistance to their clients becoming increasingly technodexterous. In particularly, chatbots can efficiently conduct a dialogue, usually substituting other communication tools such as email, phone, or SMS. In banking area their major application is related to quick customer service answering common requests, and transactional support.

Several studies accomplished by analytics agencies such as Juniper or Gartner [34] report significant reduction of cost of customer services, leading to billions of dollars of economy in the next 10 years. Gartner predicts an integration by 2020 of chatbots in at least 85% of all client's applications to customer service. Juniper's study announces an impressive amount of $8 billion retained annually by 2022 due to the use of chatbots.

Since 2016 when Facebook allows businesses to deliver automated customer support, e-commerce guidance, content and interactive experiences through chatbots, a large variety of chatbots for Facebook Messenger platform were developed.[35] In 2016, Russia-based Tochka Bank launched the world's first Facebook bot for a range of financial services, in particularly including a possibility of making payments. [36] In July 2016, Barclays Africa also launched a Facebook chatbot, making it the first bank to do so in Africa. [37]

The France's third largest bank by total assets [38] Societe Generale launched their chatbot called SoBot in March 2018. While the 80% of users of the SoBot express their satisfaction after having tested it, il will never remplace the expertise provided by a human advisor according to SG deputy director Bertrand Cozzarolo. [39]

There are several potential advantages of using chatbots in interaction with customer in banking:[40]

Cost reduction. Chatbots eliminate the obligation of any human presence during online interaction and are so long seen as a huge advantage by companies operating with multiple repetitive queries at once as long as they don't require any decision-making procedure.[41]
Human touch. Chatbots, providing an interface similar to human-to-human interaction, are more intuitive and so less difficult to use than a standard banking mobile application. They doesn't require any additional software installation and are more adaptive as able to be personalized during the exploitation by the means of machine learning. Chatbots are instant and so much faster that phone calls, shown to be considered as tedious in some studies. Then they satisfy both speed and personalization requirement while interacting with a bank.
Financial advice. State-of-the-art banking assistants can, by accessing personal customer's data such as consumer behavior or history of purchases, provide useful information on client's account and use it to develop AI-Based recommendations for better adapted money management.
Attracting new clients. A chatbot greeting a bank's website guest can provide some useful and relevant information, helping to exploit the offered products and services in a personalized manner helps to attract the potential client and the he is more likely to end by creation of a new account.[40]
24/7 digital support. An instant and always accessible assistant is assumed by the more and more digital consumer of the new era.[34] Unlike humans, chatbots once developed and installed don't have a limited workdays, holidays or weekends and are ready to attend queries at any hour of the day. It helps to the customer to avoid waiting of a company's agent to be available. Thus, the customer doesn't have to wait for the company executive to help them. This also lets companies keep an eye on the traffic during the non-working hours and reach out to them later.[41]
Toys
Chatbots have also been incorporated into devices not primarily meant for computing such as toys.[42]

Hello Barbie is an Internet-connected version of the doll that uses a chatbot provided by the company ToyTalk,[43] which previously used the chatbot for a range of smartphone-based characters for children.[44] These characters' behaviors are constrained by a set of rules that in effect emulate a particular character and produce a storyline.[45]

IBM's Watson computer has been used as the basis for chatbot-based educational toys for companies such as CogniToys[42] intended to interact with children for educational purposes.[46]

Chat-bots In Support Automation

Chatbots like Morph.ai, Haptik, Yekaliva[47] are used in business website for providing support. It helps by answering FAQ's in the first level.

Chatbots in Medicine and for Mental Health
According to the Journal of Medical Internet Research, "Chatbots are [...] increasingly used in particular for mental health applications, prevention and behavior change applications (such as smoking cessation or physical activity interventions).".[48] They have been shown to serve as a cost-effective and accessible therapeutic agents for indications such as depression and anxiety.[49] A conversational agent called Woebot has been shown to significantly reduce depression in young adults.[50]

Chatbot development platforms
The process of building, testing and deploying chatbots can be done on cloud-based chatbot development platforms[51] offered by cloud Platform as a Service (PaaS) providers such as Oracle Cloud Platform Yekaliva[47][28] and IBM Watson.[52][53][54] These cloud platforms provide Natural Language Processing, Artificial Intelligence and Mobile Backend as a Service for chatbot development.

API

Some Companies like Microsoft Azure and AARC are currently providing their Bot Engines through which chatbot Platforms or Software can be developed

Malicious use
Malicious chatbots are frequently used to fill chat rooms with spam and advertisements, by mimicking human behavior and conversations or to entice people into revealing personal information, such as bank account numbers. They are commonly found on Yahoo! Messenger, Windows Live Messenger, AOL Instant Messenger and other instant messaging protocols. There has also been a published report of a chatbot used in a fake personal ad on a dating service's website.[55]

Tay, an AI chatbot that learns from previous interaction, caused major controversy due to it being targeted by internet trolls on Twitter. The bot was exploited, and after 16 hours began to send extremely offensive Tweets to users. This suggests that although the bot learnt effectively from experience, adequate protection was not put in place to prevent misuse.[56]

Examples of malicious uses for Chatbots
Disruption of emergency and support services : 
There have been cases of messages sent by people in danger in order to be saved. Those texts when received can require important means, both financial and human.[57] Such texts could be invented by malicious actors to confound and disturb emergency services for a large array of purposes, including terrorist ones.

Bullying and harassment : 
Chatbots could be used as weapons on the social networks such as Twitter or Facebook. An entity or individuals could design create a countless number of chatbots to harass people. They could even try to track how successful their harassment is by using machine-learning-based methods to sharpen their strategies and counteract harassment detection tools.

Spreading misinformation : 
If a text-sending algorithm can pass itself off as a human instead of a chatbot, its message would be more credible. Therefore, human-seeming chatbots with well-crafted online identities could start scattering fake news that seem plausible, for instance making false claims during a presidential election. With enough chatbots, it might be even possible to achieve artificial social proof.[58][59]

Limitations of Chatbots
The creation and implementation of chatbots is still a developing area, heavily related to artificial intelligence and machine learning, so the provided solutions, while possessing obvious advantages, have some important limitations in terms of functionalities and use cases. However this is changing over time.

The most common ones are listed below:[60]

As the database, used for output generation, is fixed and limited, chatbots can fail while dealing with an unsaved query.[41]
Chatbot's efficiency highly depends on language processing and is limited because of irregularities, such as accents and mistakes that can create an important barrier for international and multi-cultural organisations [61]
Chatbots are unable to deal with multiple questions at the same time and so conversation opportunities are limited.[60]
As it happens usually with technology-led changes in existing services, some consumers, more often than not from the old generation, are uncomfortable with chatbots due to their limited understanding, making it obvious that their requests are being dealt machines.[60]
Chatbots killing jobs
Chatbots are predicted to be progressively present in businesses and will automate tasks that do not require skill-based talents. Companies are getting smarter with touchpoints and customer service now comes in the form of instant messenger, as well as phone calls. IBM recently predicted that 85% of customer service enquiries will be handled by AI as early as 2020.[62] The call centre workers may be particularly at risk from AI.[63]

A study by Forrester (June 2017) predicts that 25% of today's jobs will most likely be impacted by AI technologies by 2019.[64]

See also
Applications of artificial intelligence
Eugene Goostman
Interactive online characters
Social bot
Twitterbot
List of chatterbots
Citations
 "What is a chatbot?". techtarget.com. Retrieved 30 January 2017.
 Mauldin 1994
 Orf, Darren. "Google Assistant Is a Mega AI Bot That Wants To Be Absoutely Everywhere".
 "The 8 best chatbots of 2016". 21 December 2016.
 "2017 Messenger Bot Landscape, a Public Spreadsheet Gathering 1000+ Messenger Bots". 3 May 2017.
 https://georgianpartners.com/investment-thesis-areas/overview-conversational-ai/
 (Turing 1950)
 (Weizenbaum 1966, p. 36)
 (Weizenbaum 1966, pp. 44–5)
 GüzeldereFranchi 1995
 Computer History Museum 2006
 Sondheim 1997
 Network Working Group 1973—Transcript of a session between Parry and Eliza. (This is not the dialogue from the ICCC, which took place October 24–26, 1972, whereas this session is from September 18, 1972.)
 www.everything.com 13 November 1999
 (in German) Chatroboter simulieren Menschen
 Beaver, Laurie (July 2016). The Chatbots Explainer. BI Intelligence.
 "Facebook Messenger Hits 100,000 bots". 2017-04-18. Retrieved 2017-09-22.
 "KLM claims airline first with WhatsApp Business Platform".
 Staff, Forbes (26 October 2017). "Aeroméxico te atenderá por WhatsApp durante 2018". Retrieved 2 July 2018.
 Redacción (27 October 2017). "Podrás hacer 'check in' y consultar tu vuelo con Aeroméxico a través de WhatsApp". Huffington Post. Retrieved 2 July 2018 – via Huff Post.
 "Building for People, and Now Businesses". WhatsApp.com. Retrieved 2 July 2018.
 "She is the company's most effective employee". Nordea News.
 "Better believe the bot boom is blowing up big for B2B, B2C businesses". VentureBeat. 2016-07-24.
 "Chatbots Take Education To the Next Level – Chatbot News Daily". Chatbot News Daily. 2016-09-29. Retrieved 2017-06-23.
 "The AI Revolution is Underway! – PM360". www.pm360online.com. Retrieved 2 July 2018.
 "80% of businesses want chatbots by 2020". Retrieved 2 July 2018.
 "A Virtual Travel Agent With All the Answers". The New York Times. 4 March 2008.
 "Chatbot vendor directory released –". www.hypergridbusiness.com.
 "Rare Carat's Watson-powered chatbot will help you put a diamond ring on it". TechCrunch. February 15, 2017.
 "10 ways you may have already used IBM Watson". VentureBeat. March 10, 2017.
 Greenfield, Rebecca. "Chatbots Are Your Newest, Dumbest Co-Workers". Bloomberg.
 "Facebook opens its Messenger platform to chatbots". 12 April 2016.
 "Chatbot Reference Architecture". 1 January 2019.
 "HOW CHATBOTS ARE TRANSFORMING WALL STREET AND MAIN STREET BANKS?". 1 April 2019.
 "Facebook launches Messenger platrofm with chatbots". 1 April 2019.
 "?????????? ???? ???????? ???-???? ? Facebook". 1 April 2019.
 "Absa launches 'world-first' Facebook Messenger banking". 1 April 2019.
 "The Biggest French Banks by Total Assets". Banks around the World. Retrieved April 1, 2019.
 "GAGNER DU TEMPS AVEC LE CHATBOT BANCAIRE POUR GAGNER EN INTELLIGENCE AVEC LES CONSEILLERS". Marketing Client. Retrieved April 1, 2019.
 "Meet 11 of the Most Interesting Chatbots in Banking". The Financial Brain. Retrieved April 1, 2019.
 "CHATBOTS: BOON OR BANE?". bluelupin. Retrieved April 1, 2019.
 Amy (2015-02-23). "Conversational Toys – The Latest Trend in Speech Technology". Virtual Agent Chat. Retrieved 2016-08-11.
 NAGY, EVIE. "USING TOYTALK TECHNOLOGY, NEW HELLO BARBIE WILL HAVE REAL CONVERSATIONS WITH KIDS". Fast Company. Retrieved 18 March 2015.
 Oren Jacob, the co-founder and CEO of ToyTalk interviewed on the TV show Triangulation on the TWiT.tv network
 "Artificial intelligence script tool".
 Takahashi, Dean. "Elemental's smart connected toy taps IBM's Watson supercomputer for its brains". Venture Beat. Retrieved 15 May 2015.
 "Top 60 chatbots".
 "JMIR e-collection "Chatbots and Conversational Agents in Health and Medicine"". Journal of Medical Internet Research. JMIR Publications.
 Fulmer, R; Joerin, A; Gentile, B; Lakerink, L; Rauws, M (13 December 2018). "Using Psychological Artificial Intelligence (Tess) to Relieve Symptoms of Depression and Anxiety: Randomized Controlled Trial". JMIR Mental Health. 5 (4): e64. doi:10.2196/mental.9782. PMC 6315222. PMID 30545815.
 Fitzpatrick, KK; Darcy, A; Vierhile, M (6 June 2017). "Delivering Cognitive Behavior Therapy to Young Adults With Symptoms of Depression and Anxiety Using a Fully Automated Conversational Agent (Woebot): A Randomized Controlled Trial". JMIR Mental Health. 4 (2): e19. doi:10.2196/mental.7785. PMC 5478797. PMID 28588005.
 Yuan, Michael (2018-02-19). Chatbots: Building Intelligent, Cross-Platform, Messaging Bots. Pearson Education. ISBN 9780134650616.
 "Oracle launches a chatbot development platform | VentureBeat". venturebeat.com. Retrieved 2017-11-15.
 "Oracle Introduces AI-Powered Intelligent Bots to Help Enterprises Engage Customers and Employees". www.oracle.com. Retrieved 2017-11-15.
 "Mobile Service | Oracle Cloud". cloud.oracle.com. Retrieved 2017-11-15.
 "From Russia With Love" (PDF). Retrieved 2007-12-09. Psychologist and Scientific American: Mind contributing editor Robert Epstein reports how he was initially fooled by a chatterbot posing as an attractive girl in a personal ad he answered on a dating website. In the ad, the girl portrayed herself as being in Southern California and then soon revealed, in poor English, that she was actually in Russia. He became suspicious after a couple of months of email exchanges, sent her an email test of gibberish, and she still replied in general terms. The dating website is not named. Scientific American: Mind, October–November 2007, page 16–17, "From Russia With Love: How I got fooled (and somewhat humiliated) by a computer". Also available online.
 Bird, Jordan J.; Ekart, Aniko; Faria, Diego R. (June 2018). Advances in Computational Intelligence Systems (1st ed.). Nottingham, UK: Springer. pp. 179–190. ISBN 978-3-319-97982-3. Retrieved 3 December 2018.
 "An Afghan kid saved thanks to a message he sent". Retrieved 2016-04-08.
 "Fake News". Retrieved 2018-11-20.
 "Malicious uses". Retrieved 2016-05-11.
 "Meet 11 of the Most Interesting Chatbots in Banking". Retrieved 2019-04-01.
 "Why chatbots fail (and why natural languages are hard)". Retrieved 2019-04-01.
 "Artificial Intelligence Will Kill These Jobs (And #5 Has Nobody Else To Blame)". Retrieved 2019-04-01.
 "How talking machines are taking call centre jobs". Retrieved 2019-04-01.
 "How chatbots are killing jobs (and creating new ones)". June 2017. Retrieved 2019-04-01.
References
Computer History Museum (2006), "Internet History—1970's", Exhibits, Computer History Museum, archived from the original on 2008-02-21, retrieved 2008-03-05
Güzeldere, Güven; Franchi, Stefano (1995-07-24), "Constructions of the Mind", Stanford Humanities Review, SEHR, Stanford University, 4 (2), retrieved 2008-03-05
Mauldin, Michael (1994), "ChatterBots, TinyMuds, and the Turing Test: Entering the Loebner Prize Competition", Proceedings of the Eleventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press, retrieved 2008-03-05 (abstract)
Network Working Group (1973), "RFC 439, PARRY Encounters the DOCTOR", Internet Engineering Task Force, Internet Society, retrieved 2008-03-05
Sondheim, Alan J (1997), <nettime> Important Documents from the Early Internet (1972), nettime.org, archived from the original on 2008-06-13, retrieved 2008-03-05
Searle, John (1980), "Minds, Brains and Programs", Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3 (3): 417–457, doi:10.1017/S0140525X00005756
Shevat, Amir (2017). Designing bots: Creating conversational experiences (First ed.). Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media. ISBN 9781491974827. OCLC 962125282.
Turing, Alan (1950), "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", Mind, 59 (236): 433–60, doi:10.1093/mind/lix.236.433
Weizenbaum, Joseph (January 1966), "ELIZA—A Computer Program For the Study of Natural Language Communication Between Man And Machine", Communications of the ACM, 9 (1): 36–45, doi:10.1145/365153.365168
vte
Natural language processing
Desktop computer clipart - Yellow theme.svgInformation technology portalGlobe of letters.svgLanguage portal
Categories: ChatterbotsInstant messagingInteractive narrativeNatural language parsing
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikibooks

Languages
???????
?????
Español
Français
Bahasa Indonesia
Português
???????
?????
??
23 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 22 May 2019, at 23:08 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki


FluentU EnglishEnglish Language and Culture BlogWant to speak English naturally?
english-conversation-for-beginners
by KATYARYABOVA
English Conversation for Beginners: 45+ Phrases for the English Speaking Adventure of a Lifetime
Did you know that English conversation can take you on a fun adventure?

Conversing (talking) with others in English opens up a whole new world of opportunities.

Thanks to English, you will be able to talk with people who don’t speak your native language.

This lets you hear ideas and opinions from people who grew up in different cultures. You might even make new lifelong friends!

Talking in English will also be adventurous because you will probably feel a little nervous and excited.

But if you push your English speaking “comfort zone” and just open your mouth, you will feel so accomplished (proud) and motivated to keep learning!

Plus, your English will improve a lot if you have more conversations.

So let’s get started! To help you on this trip, we’ve put together a friendly guide to English conversation for beginners, filled with useful, basic phrases—from greetings and small talk to saying goodbye—that will take you on your first conversation adventure.
 
Download: This blog post is available as a convenient and portable PDF that you can take anywhere. Click here to get a copy. (Download)


 
English Conversation for Beginners: 45+ Phrases for the English Speaking Adventure of a Lifetime
Learn a foreign language with videos
Starting an English Conversation
If you need a push to start having conversations in English, watch the clip below for motivation.



Then, any polite conversation starts with a greeting (saying hello). There are many ways to greet someone, and your choice will depend on who you are talking to.

It may be an informal conversation with a friend or an acquaintance (someone you know, but not very well). Or you may use a more formal dialogue when having an English conversation with a colleague, a teacher, a stranger or a government employee.

Informal greetings
Let’s start with informal greetings. Here is how you can say hello:

Hello! 
(A universal greeting that works for every conversation.)
Hi! 
(A neutral and friendly greeting.)
Hey! 
(An informal and relaxed greeting.)
Greetings! 
(This is quite formal and rare these days, but could be used humorously among friends.)
Formal greetings
For a more formal way to greet someone, use the model “good + [time of day]”:

Good morning!
(Reserved for any time before noon.)
Good afternoon! 
(Typically used between noon and 5-6 p.m.)
Good evening!
(Any time after 6 p.m.)
Remember that “good night” normally means that you are saying goodbye. It is also commonly used right before going to bed.

Introductions
What if you have never met the person you are talking to before? Then, after greeting them, it would be polite to introduce yourself and ask for their name. Here’s how:

My name is _____. What’s your name? 
(This is simple, neutral and always works well!)
If you met somebody once before, but you do not remember their name, you can say this:

I’m sorry, I don’t remember your name. You are…? 
(This is a bit more informal.)
If you want to introduce a person to someone else, you can simply say:

Please meet + [name]
Please meet my friend Tom!
(Formal introduction)
This is + [name]
This is Tom!
(Common introduction)
Now that you have introduced yourself, use one of the phrases below to respond to someone’s introduction.

Nice to meet you! 
(The most common)
Pleased to meet you!
(Simple and polite)
It’s a pleasure! 
(Informal, but nice)
You can hear the first one in this video, where two people meet for the first time and then start a conversation. Better yet, since that video is available on FluentU, you don’t have to worry about missing a word. Just click the interactive subtitles for an instant definition. There are also flashcards, fun quizzes and other learning tools built in.

Check out a free FluentU trial to watch that video—and thousands of other real-world English videos—with all the learning features.

Making Small Talk in English
Great job! You are already having a conversation in English!

After you have exchanged names and greeted each other, you may go on to make some “small talk.”

Small talk is common in many English-speaking countries, especially in the U.S., Canada and England. It is considered polite to add small talk to the beginning of the conversation before talking about the subject of the conversation, whether it is personal or professional.

The most widespread (common) question is “How are you?” In fact, it is so common, that it becomes automatic for people to say, even when they hardly know the person! “How are you” is often even considered part of the greeting (i.e. “Hi, how are you?”). That is how necessary it has become!

There are several ways to ask someone how they are doing:

How are you? / How are you doing? 
(Neutral)
How’s it going? 
(More informal)
How are things? 
(Informal)
What’s up? 
(Very informal)
An interesting thing about asking these questions is that an answer is not really required. Unless you are very close friends with someone, they are not expecting you to tell them an honest answer about your day—as this funny video shows:



Instead, a simple answer and a “how are you” in return is enough for a typical conversation in English:

I’m well. How are you?
It’s going well, thank you. How are you doing?
Fine, thanks. And yourself?
Note that you might often hear people say “I’m good” when they mean that they are well and doing well. “I’m good” is grammatically incorrect in this context, but it is very common in spoken English, just like a few other mistakes English speakers make, so be careful!

Small talk can also be the primary goal of a conversation, especially when you are talking to people you don’t know and are unlikely to meet again. There are many ways to use small talk successfully, even when you’re still getting comfortable with English conversation for beginners.

Asking and Answering Questions
A conversation is an exchange of ideas, questions and thoughts. The best way to keep a conversation going is to ask questions!

There are two types of questions you may ask: closed-ended and open-ended questions.

Closed-ended questions are also called “yes/no” questions, because their goal is to confirm or deny certain information. For example:

Are you having a good day?
Did you just get to the office?
Have you seen my email?
Compare the examples above to the open-ended questions below. They will ask a person to elaborate—that is, to give more information instead of simply saying “yes” or “no.”

How is your day going? 
(A perfect example of small talk!)
When did you arrive at the office?
What do you think about that email I sent?
Open-ended questions typically begin with “who,” “what,” “where,” “when” and “why.” They are important to make your English conversation informative and productive. See more examples here.

When the person you are talking to is asking you a question, listen for the keywords and pay attention to the verb being used. This will help you construct your answer using proper grammar.

Don’t worry about using difficult words—it is fine to keep things simple! And if you don’t understand a certain question or word, don’t be afraid to ask.

As a beginner, you may have trouble understanding everything being said in English. This is okay! You are still learning.

Asking for Clarification
You are getting good at conversations in English, but suddenly you realize that you are lost. Maybe the other person is speaking too fast. Maybe she has an unfamiliar accent. Maybe you didn’t hear the last thing she said.

It is perfectly normal to ask for clarification or to repeat something. Just remember to be polite!

If you don’t understand something, let’s say a word or even some idea relating to your conversation, you could say:

I’m sorry, I don’t understand. Could you please repeat that?
I’m sorry, I don’t understand. Could you please explain that?
or even…

Care to elaborate?
(This very informal question is the short version of “Do you care to elaborate on this?”)
If you simply didn’t hear something, just say it like this:

I’m sorry, I didn’t hear that. Could you please repeat?
I’m sorry, I didn’t catch that. Could you please repeat?
or even…

Could you say that again, please?
Don’t be shy to ask for help. People are generally very happy to explain or repeat something! Please don’t forget to thank them after they do.

Bringing an English Conversation to a Close
Say you have got all the information you need from the person. It is time for you to go. Maybe you are running late and want to keep the conversation brief. No matter the reason, it is always nice to let the person know you cannot continue talking to them for much longer.

There are many ways to do it depending on the situation. For example, if you are late, say:

I have to get going. / It’s time for me to go. 
(This is polite and neutral.)
I have to run—can we continue later? 
(This is more informal, but also polite.)
And if you have all the information you’d wanted:

Thank you so much for your help! 
(A very common and useful expression)
Got it, thanks! 
(Very informal and friendly)
I think I have everything I need, thank you! 
(This is formal and may come across as rude if you don’t thank the person after, so use it with caution.)
Using Small Talk to End a Conversation
Hey, guess what? Small talk can be used at the end of an English conversation too! Before saying goodbye, it is polite to say something like…

Have a good day! 
(This works in any situation.)
Enjoy your day! 
(This one is a bit more formal.)
Good luck! 
(If the person needs it; it will depend on the situation.)
Talk to you soon! 
(This is neutral and does not necessarily mean that you will really talk to the person soon.)
Great seeing you / Great talking to you! 
(This is informal yet common.)
Catch you later! 
(This is very informal and fun.)
And after that, the only thing left to do is…

Saying Goodbye in English
This one is easy. You really cannot go wrong with just a simple “goodbye” or “bye” in spoken English. You can also use any small talk expression to complement your goodbye. For example:

Bye! Have a good day!
Catch you later! Bye-bye!
And, as mentioned at the very beginning of this guide…

Good night!
 

Simple, right?

You are now an English conversation master!

Having a conversation in English does not have to be complicated. You may feel a little awkward and shy about your English speaking at first, but it is okay.

If you are scared of making a mistake, it is understandable. But mistakes are going to happen when you get started with spoken English—it is absolutely normal. Making mistakes is a big part of learning English conversations for beginners. This is how you get better, so just go for it. Just start talking, because now you know what to say!

Download: This blog post is available as a convenient and portable PDF that you can take anywhere. Click here to get a copy. (Download)


 
And One More Thing…
Want to hear real English conversations without leaving your home?

It’s easy with FluentU.

FluentU provides real-world English videos—like movie trailers, TV commercials, hilarious YouTube clips and more—that come with built-in language learning tools.

best English apps

For example, every video comes with interactive subtitles. Click any word for an instant, in-context definition. You’ll also see grammar info and example sentences.

best English apps

Tap on the word “brought,” and you see this:

best English apps

After you watch a video, FluentU will give you flashcards, fun quizzes and useful questions. That way you can be sure you’ll remember everything you learned.

best English apps

It’s the perfect way to learn English the way native speakers really use it. The videos are conveniently organized by format and level (beginner through advanced) so it’s super easy to find the ones that work for you.

Best of all, you can practice conversational English on FluentU anytime, anywhere on your computer or with the mobile apps for iOS and Android.

If you liked this post, something tells me that you'll love FluentU, the best way to learn English with real-world videos.

Experience English immersion online!

 How to Describe Your Entire Daily Routine in 65 English Vocabulary WordsScary Monsters (and Super Creeps): 31 Fun English Vocabulary Words to Talk About Halloween 
Comments are closed.

Search
Search...
Popular Posts
Learn English through Movies and Film: A Complete Guide
8 Great Tips to Learn English Through Songs and Music
9 Awesome Channels to Learn English on YouTube
How to Learn English Through the News
10 Best 90's Sitcoms for English Learners
12 English Podcasts Every English Learner Should Listen To
20 Essential American Slang Words for English Learners
20 Essential English Idioms for Sounding Like a Native
Categories
English Learning Resources
English Learning Tips
English Vocab and Grammar
FluentU
About FluentU
FluentU brings English to life with real-world videos.
Learning English becomes fun and easy when you learn with movie trailers, music videos, news and inspiring talks.

Try FluentU for Free
 
 
 

FTC Disclosure
FluentU is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to Amazon.com.

We also participate in other affiliate advertising programs and receive compensation for recommending products and services we believe in.

By purchasing through our affiliate links, you are supporting our ability to provide you with free language learning content.

Partnerships
Interested in sharing your language learning resource with our audience? Contact Us to request information about sponsored posts and product reviews.

© 2019 FluentFlix Limited. All Rights Reserved.

Contact UsFollow Us
 2
SharesPinterest2FacebookTwitterGoogle+EmailSumoMe


What’s your name?
My name’s Jacob

Where are you from?
I’m from London

Where do you come from?
I come from London

That’s another way of asking the question, where are you from?

What is your surname?
Brown

What is your family name?
My family name is Brown.

This is another way of asking someone’s surname. Family name and surname mean the same thing.

What’s your first name?
My first name is John.

What’s your address?
I stay at, 13 United Street.

Where do you live?
I live in England.

What’s your telephone number?
My number is 845 676

What’s your email address?

You can email me at john@gmail.com

How old are you?
Thirty-eight.

I’m Thirty-eight years old.

When and where were you born?
I was born in 1974 in London.

Are you married?
No am single
Yes, I am married

What’s your marital status?
I’m married.

What do you do? or What’s your job?
I’m an English teacher.

I teach English at the High School.

Where did you go ?
I went  shopping with a friend.

What did you buy?
We bought some new clothes on sale.

Where were you?
I was in London for the weekend.

Have you got a car / job / house / etc.?
Yes, I’ve got a hatch back.
Yes, I drive a sedan.

A hatch back car has a  full width door at the back end, that opens upwards to provide easy access for loading.

A sedan car is a four-door vehicle that often seats four to five people and has characteristics such as a closed roof.

Have you got a house?
No, I live in a flat.

Have you got any children?
Yes, I’ve got three children – two boys and a daughter.
No, not yet.

Can you play tennis?
Yes, I can play Tennis.

No, I play football.

Can you speak English?
No, I can’t speak Chinese.

Yes, I can. But I am not fluent, I am learning to speak English.

Could you speak English when you were five years old?
Yes, I could speak English when I was five years old.

No, I couldn’t. English is not my native language.

Introducing Yourself and Saying Hello
How do you do?
How do you do. Pleased to meet you.

How are you?
Fine, thanks. And you?

Shopping questions
How can I help you?

May I help you?
Yes. I’m looking for a sweater.

No thanks, I am just looking around.

Can I try it on?
Sure, the changing rooms are over there.

Have you got something bigger?
Certainly, we’ve got  larger sizes as well.

How much does it cost? How much is it?
This shirt is for 50$

How would you like to pay?
I would like to pay by cash.

Can I pay by credit card?
Certainly. We accept all the major cards.

Asking Something Specific questions
What’s that?
It’s a smart watch.

What time is it?
It’s one o’clock.

May I open the window?
Certainly. It’s very hot in the office today!

Is there a bakery near here?
Yes. There is a bakery nearby, take the next corner and it’s next to the bank.

Where is the nearest bank?
The nearest bank is on united street.

Who wrote this article?
Michelle wrote this article “The Sun Also Rises”.

Is there any rice?
Yes, there’s a lot of rice left.

Are there any sandwiches?
No, there aren’t any sandwiches left.

Is this your book?
No, I think it’s his book.

Whose is that?
It’s Henry. My sisters fiance

Questions using the word ‘Like’
What do you like to do on weekends?
I like playing cricket, reading and listening to pop music.

What does she look like?
She’s tall and slim with blonde hair.

What would you like to eat?
I’d like a burger, chips and soda.

What is it like?
It’s an interesting country many things to see and do.

What’s the weather like?
It’s raining heavily at the moment.

Would you like some coffee?
Yes, thank you. I’d like some coffee.

Would you like something to drink?
Thank you. Could I have a cup of coffee and some cake?

Asking for an Opinion
What’s it about?
It’s about a young girl who has many adventures.

What do you think about this book?
I think the book is very interesting.

Is it difficult to prepare for IELTS?
It’s not if your practice well.

What are your views on Donald Trump as the America’s President?

That’s a good question, well I am speechless.

How was the movie?
It was very interesting. You should watch it.

How do you feel about Clara?
Clara is quite friendly and helpful.

Suggestions
How about I pick you up at eight o’clock on my way to the airport?

Great. I’ll see you then.

how about some lunch?

Yeah! Sure, I am hungry.

Why don’t you take some time out and rest?

That’s a good idea.

What shall we do this evening?
Let’s go see a movie.

Why don’t we go out visit some old friends this afternoon?
Yes, that sounds like a great idea.

I have nothing to wear to the party.

You could wear your Blue jacket and black shoes.


 This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.
Astronomy
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the scientific study of celestial objects. For other uses, see Astronomy (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with astrology, the pseudoscience.

A giant Hubble mosaic of the Crab Nebula, a supernova remnant

The Milky Way as viewed from La Silla Observatory
Astronomy (from Greek: ?st????µ?a) is a natural science that studies celestial objects and phenomena. It applies mathematics, physics, and chemistry in an effort to explain the origin of those objects and phenomena and their evolution. Objects of interest include planets, moons, stars, nebulae, galaxies, and comets; the phenomena also includes supernova explosions, gamma ray bursts, quasars, blazars, pulsars, and cosmic microwave background radiation. More generally, all phenomena that originate outside Earth's atmosphere are within the purview of astronomy. A branch of astronomy called cosmology is the study of the Universe as a whole.[1]

Astronomy is one of the oldest of the natural sciences. The early civilizations in recorded history, such as the Babylonians, Greeks, Indians, Egyptians, Nubians, Iranians, Chinese, Maya, and many ancient indigenous peoples of the Americas, performed methodical observations of the night sky. Historically, astronomy has included disciplines as diverse as astrometry, celestial navigation, observational astronomy, and the making of calendars, but professional astronomy is now often considered to be synonymous with astrophysics.[2]

Professional astronomy is split into observational and theoretical branches. Observational astronomy is focused on acquiring data from observations of astronomical objects, which is then analyzed using basic principles of physics. Theoretical astronomy is oriented toward the development of computer or analytical models to describe astronomical objects and phenomena. The two fields complement each other, with theoretical astronomy seeking to explain observational results and observations being used to confirm theoretical results.

Astronomy is one of the few sciences in which amateurs still play an active role, especially in the discovery and observation of transient events. Amateur astronomers have made and contributed to many important astronomical discoveries, such as finding new comets.


Contents
1	Etymology
1.1	Use of terms "astronomy" and "astrophysics"
2	History
2.1	Ancient times
2.2	Middle Ages
2.3	Scientific revolution
3	Observational astronomy
3.1	Radio astronomy
3.2	Infrared astronomy
3.3	Optical astronomy
3.4	Ultraviolet astronomy
3.5	X-ray astronomy
3.6	Gamma-ray astronomy
3.7	Fields not based on the electromagnetic spectrum
3.8	Astrometry and celestial mechanics
4	Theoretical astronomy
5	Specific subfields
5.1	Astrophysics
5.2	Astrochemistry
5.3	Astrobiology
5.4	Physical cosmology
5.5	Extragalactic astronomy
5.6	Galactic astronomy
5.7	Stellar astronomy
5.8	Solar astronomy
5.9	Planetary science
6	Interdisciplinary studies
7	Amateur astronomy
8	Unsolved problems in astronomy
9	See also
10	References
11	Bibliography
12	External links
Etymology

19th-century Sydney Observatory, Australia (1873) [3]

19th-century Quito Astronomical Observatory is located 12 minutes south of the Equator in Quito, Ecuador.[4]
Astronomy (from the Greek ?st????µ?a from ?st??? astron, "star" and -??µ?a -nomia from ??µ?? nomos, "law" or "culture") means "law of the stars" (or "culture of the stars" depending on the translation). Astronomy should not be confused with astrology, the belief system which claims that human affairs are correlated with the positions of celestial objects.[5] Although the two fields share a common origin, they are now entirely distinct.[6]

Use of terms "astronomy" and "astrophysics"
Generally, both of the terms "astronomy" and "astrophysics" may be used to refer to the same subject.[7][8][9] Based on strict dictionary definitions, "astronomy" refers to "the study of objects and matter outside the Earth's atmosphere and of their physical and chemical properties,"[10] while "astrophysics" refers to the branch of astronomy dealing with "the behavior, physical properties, and dynamic processes of celestial objects and phenomena."[11] In some cases, as in the introduction of the introductory textbook The Physical Universe by Frank Shu, "astronomy" may be used to describe the qualitative study of the subject, whereas "astrophysics" is used to describe the physics-oriented version of the subject.[12] However, since most modern astronomical research deals with subjects related to physics, modern astronomy could actually be called astrophysics.[7] Some fields, such as astrometry, are purely astronomy rather than also astrophysics. Various departments in which scientists carry out research on this subject may use "astronomy" and "astrophysics", partly depending on whether the department is historically affiliated with a physics department,[8] and many professional astronomers have physics rather than astronomy degrees.[9] Some titles of the leading scientific journals in this field include The Astronomical Journal, The Astrophysical Journal, and Astronomy and Astrophysics.

History

A celestial map from the 17th century, by the Dutch cartographer Frederik de Wit
Main article: History of astronomy
Further information: Archaeoastronomy and List of astronomers
Ancient times
In early historic times, astronomy only consisted of the observation and predictions of the motions of objects visible to the naked eye. In some locations, early cultures assembled massive artifacts that possibly had some astronomical purpose. In addition to their ceremonial uses, these observatories could be employed to determine the seasons, an important factor in knowing when to plant crops and in understanding the length of the year.[13]

Before tools such as the telescope were invented, early study of the stars was conducted using the naked eye. As civilizations developed, most notably in Mesopotamia, Greece, Persia, India, China, Egypt, and Central America, astronomical observatories were assembled and ideas on the nature of the Universe began to develop. Most early astronomy consisted of mapping the positions of the stars and planets, a science now referred to as astrometry. From these observations, early ideas about the motions of the planets were formed, and the nature of the Sun, Moon and the Earth in the Universe were explored philosophically. The Earth was believed to be the center of the Universe with the Sun, the Moon and the stars rotating around it. This is known as the geocentric model of the Universe, or the Ptolemaic system, named after Ptolemy.[14]

A particularly important early development was the beginning of mathematical and scientific astronomy, which began among the Babylonians, who laid the foundations for the later astronomical traditions that developed in many other civilizations.[15] The Babylonians discovered that lunar eclipses recurred in a repeating cycle known as a saros.[16]


Greek equatorial sundial, Alexandria on the Oxus, present-day Afghanistan 3rd–2nd century BCE
Following the Babylonians, significant advances in astronomy were made in ancient Greece and the Hellenistic world. Greek astronomy is characterized from the start by seeking a rational, physical explanation for celestial phenomena.[17] In the 3rd century BC, Aristarchus of Samos estimated the size and distance of the Moon and Sun, and he proposed a model of the Solar System where the Earth and planets rotated around the Sun, now called the heliocentric model.[18] In the 2nd century BC, Hipparchus discovered precession, calculated the size and distance of the Moon and invented the earliest known astronomical devices such as the astrolabe.[19] Hipparchus also created a comprehensive catalog of 1020 stars, and most of the constellations of the northern hemisphere derive from Greek astronomy.[20] The Antikythera mechanism (c. 150–80 BC) was an early analog computer designed to calculate the location of the Sun, Moon, and planets for a given date. Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century, when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe.[21]

Middle Ages
Medieval Europe housed a number of important astronomers. Richard of Wallingford (1292–1336) made major contributions to astronomy and horology, including the invention of the first astronomical clock, the Rectangulus which allowed for the measurement of angles between planets and other astronomical bodies, as well as an equatorium called the Albion which could be used for astronomical calculations such as lunar, solar and planetary longitudes and could predict eclipses. Nicole Oresme (1320–1382) and Jean Buridan (1300–1361) first discussed evidence for the rotation of the Earth, furthermore, Buridan also developed the theory of impetus (predecessor of the modern scientific theory of inertia) which was able to show planets were capable of motion without the intervention of angels.[22] Georg von Peuerbach (1423–1461) and Regiomontanus (1436–1476) helped make astronomical progress instrumental to Copernicus's development of the heliocentric model decades later.

Astronomy flourished in the Islamic world and other parts of the world. This led to the emergence of the first astronomical observatories in the Muslim world by the early 9th century.[23][24][25] In 964, the Andromeda Galaxy, the largest galaxy in the Local Group, was described by the Persian Muslim astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in his Book of Fixed Stars.[26] The SN 1006 supernova, the brightest apparent magnitude stellar event in recorded history, was observed by the Egyptian Arabic astronomer Ali ibn Ridwan and Chinese astronomers in 1006. Some of the prominent Islamic (mostly Persian and Arab) astronomers who made significant contributions to the science include Al-Battani, Thebit, Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi, Albumasar, Biruni, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim al-Zarqali, Al-Birjandi, and the astronomers of the Maragheh and Samarkand observatories. Persian astrologer Albumasar's practical manuals for training astrologers profoundly influenced Muslim intellectual history and, through translations, that of western Europe and Byzantium.[27] His work was probably the single most important original source for the recovery of Aristotle for medieval European scholars prior to the middle of the 12th century.[28] The criticism of Ptolemy by Averroes directly influenced the Copernicus's heliocentrism.[29] Astronomers during that time introduced many Arabic names now used for individual stars.[30][31] It is also believed that the ruins at Great Zimbabwe and Timbuktu[32] may have housed astronomical observatories.[33] Europeans had previously believed that there had been no astronomical observation in sub-Saharan Africa during the pre-colonial Middle Ages, but modern discoveries show otherwise.[34][35][36][37]

For over six centuries (from the recovery of ancient learning during the late Middle Ages into the Enlightenment), the Roman Catholic Church gave more financial and social support to the study of astronomy than probably all other institutions. Among the Church's motives was finding the date for Easter.[38]

Scientific revolution

Galileo's sketches and observations of the Moon revealed that the surface was mountainous.

An astronomical chart from an early scientific manuscript, c. 1000
During the Renaissance, Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model of the solar system. His work was defended by Galileo Galilei and expanded upon by Johannes Kepler. Kepler was the first to devise a system that correctly described the details of the motion of the planets around the Sun. However, Kepler did not succeed in formulating a theory behind the laws he wrote down.[39] It was Isaac Newton, with his invention of celestial dynamics and his law of gravitation, who finally explained the motions of the planets. Newton also developed the reflecting telescope.[40]

Improvements in the size and quality of the telescope led to further discoveries. The English astronomer John Flamsteed catalogued over 3000 stars,[41] More extensive star catalogues were produced by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille. The astronomer William Herschel made a detailed catalog of nebulosity and clusters, and in 1781 discovered the planet Uranus, the first new planet found.[42] The distance to a star was announced in 1838 when the parallax of 61 Cygni was measured by Friedrich Bessel.[43]

During the 18–19th centuries, the study of the three-body problem by Leonhard Euler, Alexis Claude Clairaut, and Jean le Rond d'Alembert led to more accurate predictions about the motions of the Moon and planets. This work was further refined by Joseph-Louis Lagrange and Pierre Simon Laplace, allowing the masses of the planets and moons to be estimated from their perturbations.[44]

Significant advances in astronomy came about with the introduction of new technology, including the spectroscope and photography. Joseph von Fraunhofer discovered about 600 bands in the spectrum of the Sun in 1814–15, which, in 1859, Gustav Kirchhoff ascribed to the presence of different elements. Stars were proven to be similar to the Earth's own Sun, but with a wide range of temperatures, masses, and sizes.[30]

The existence of the Earth's galaxy, the Milky Way, as its own group of stars was only proved in the 20th century, along with the existence of "external" galaxies. The observed recession of those galaxies led to the discovery of the expansion of the Universe.[45] Theoretical astronomy led to speculations on the existence of objects such as black holes and neutron stars, which have been used to explain such observed phenomena as quasars, pulsars, blazars, and radio galaxies. Physical cosmology made huge advances during the 20th century. In the early 1900s the model of the Big Bang theory was formulated, heavily evidenced by cosmic microwave background radiation, Hubble's law, and the cosmological abundances of elements. Space telescopes have enabled measurements in parts of the electromagnetic spectrum normally blocked or blurred by the atmosphere.[citation needed] In February 2016, it was revealed that the LIGO project had detected evidence of gravitational waves in the previous September.[46][47]

Observational astronomy
Main article: Observational astronomy
The main source of information about celestial bodies and other objects is visible light, or more generally electromagnetic radiation.[48] Observational astronomy may be categorized according to the corresponding region of the electromagnetic spectrum on which the observations are made. Some parts of the spectrum can be observed from the Earth's surface, while other parts are only observable from either high altitudes or outside the Earth's atmosphere. Specific information on these subfields is given below.

Radio astronomy

The Very Large Array in New Mexico, an example of a radio telescope
Main article: Radio astronomy
Radio astronomy uses radiation with wavelengths greater than approximately one millimeter, outside the visible range.[49] Radio astronomy is different from most other forms of observational astronomy in that the observed radio waves can be treated as waves rather than as discrete photons. Hence, it is relatively easier to measure both the amplitude and phase of radio waves, whereas this is not as easily done at shorter wavelengths.[49]

Although some radio waves are emitted directly by astronomical objects, a product of thermal emission, most of the radio emission that is observed is the result of synchrotron radiation, which is produced when electrons orbit magnetic fields.[49] Additionally, a number of spectral lines produced by interstellar gas, notably the hydrogen spectral line at 21 cm, are observable at radio wavelengths.[12][49]

A wide variety of other objects are observable at radio wavelengths, including supernovae, interstellar gas, pulsars, and active galactic nuclei.[12][49]

Infrared astronomy

ALMA Observatory is one of the highest observatory sites on Earth. Atacama, Chile.[50]
Main article: Infrared astronomy
Infrared astronomy is founded on the detection and analysis of infrared radiation, wavelengths longer than red light and outside the range of our vision. The infrared spectrum is useful for studying objects that are too cold to radiate visible light, such as planets, circumstellar disks or nebulae whose light is blocked by dust. The longer wavelengths of infrared can penetrate clouds of dust that block visible light, allowing the observation of young stars embedded in molecular clouds and the cores of galaxies. Observations from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) have been particularly effective at unveiling numerous Galactic protostars and their host star clusters.[51][52] With the exception of infrared wavelengths close to visible light, such radiation is heavily absorbed by the atmosphere, or masked, as the atmosphere itself produces significant infrared emission. Consequently, infrared observatories have to be located in high, dry places on Earth or in space.[53] Some molecules radiate strongly in the infrared. This allows the study of the chemistry of space; more specifically it can detect water in comets.[54]

Optical astronomy

The Subaru Telescope (left) and Keck Observatory (center) on Mauna Kea, both examples of an observatory that operates at near-infrared and visible wavelengths. The NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (right) is an example of a telescope that operates only at near-infrared wavelengths.
Main article: Optical astronomy
Historically, optical astronomy, also called visible light astronomy, is the oldest form of astronomy.[55] Images of observations were originally drawn by hand. In the late 19th century and most of the 20th century, images were made using photographic equipment. Modern images are made using digital detectors, particularly using charge-coupled devices (CCDs) and recorded on modern medium. Although visible light itself extends from approximately 4000 Å to 7000 Å (400 nm to 700 nm),[55] that same equipment can be used to observe some near-ultraviolet and near-infrared radiation.

Ultraviolet astronomy
Main article: Ultraviolet astronomy
Ultraviolet astronomy employs ultraviolet wavelengths between approximately 100 and 3200 Å (10 to 320 nm).[49] Light at those wavelengths is absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere, requiring observations at these wavelengths to be performed from the upper atmosphere or from space. Ultraviolet astronomy is best suited to the study of thermal radiation and spectral emission lines from hot blue stars (OB stars) that are very bright in this wave band. This includes the blue stars in other galaxies, which have been the targets of several ultraviolet surveys. Other objects commonly observed in ultraviolet light include planetary nebulae, supernova remnants, and active galactic nuclei.[49] However, as ultraviolet light is easily absorbed by interstellar dust, an adjustment of ultraviolet measurements is necessary.[49]

X-ray astronomy
Main article: X-ray astronomy

X-ray jet made from a supermassive black hole found by NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory, made visible by light from the early Universe
X-ray astronomy uses X-ray wavelengths. Typically, X-ray radiation is produced by synchrotron emission (the result of electrons orbiting magnetic field lines), thermal emission from thin gases above 107 (10 million) kelvins, and thermal emission from thick gases above 107 Kelvin.[49] Since X-rays are absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere, all X-ray observations must be performed from high-altitude balloons, rockets, or X-ray astronomy satellites. Notable X-ray sources include X-ray binaries, pulsars, supernova remnants, elliptical galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and active galactic nuclei.[49]

Gamma-ray astronomy
Main article: Gamma ray astronomy
Gamma ray astronomy observes astronomical objects at the shortest wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma rays may be observed directly by satellites such as the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory or by specialized telescopes called atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes.[49] The Cherenkov telescopes do not detect the gamma rays directly but instead detect the flashes of visible light produced when gamma rays are absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere.[56]

Most gamma-ray emitting sources are actually gamma-ray bursts, objects which only produce gamma radiation for a few milliseconds to thousands of seconds before fading away. Only 10% of gamma-ray sources are non-transient sources. These steady gamma-ray emitters include pulsars, neutron stars, and black hole candidates such as active galactic nuclei.[49]

Fields not based on the electromagnetic spectrum
In addition to electromagnetic radiation, a few other events originating from great distances may be observed from the Earth.

In neutrino astronomy, astronomers use heavily shielded underground facilities such as SAGE, GALLEX, and Kamioka II/III for the detection of neutrinos. The vast majority of the neutrinos streaming through the Earth originate from the Sun, but 24 neutrinos were also detected from supernova 1987A.[49] Cosmic rays, which consist of very high energy particles (atomic nuclei) that can decay or be absorbed when they enter the Earth's atmosphere, result in a cascade of secondary particles which can be detected by current observatories.[57] Some future neutrino detectors may also be sensitive to the particles produced when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere.[49]

Gravitational-wave astronomy is an emerging field of astronomy that employs gravitational-wave detectors to collect observational data about distant massive objects. A few observatories have been constructed, such as the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Observatory LIGO. LIGO made its first detection on 14 September 2015, observing gravitational waves from a binary black hole.[58] A second gravitational wave was detected on 26 December 2015 and additional observations should continue but gravitational waves require extremely sensitive instruments.[59][60]

The combination of observations made using electromagnetic radiation, neutrinos or gravitational waves and other complementary information, is known as multi-messenger astronomy.[61][62]

Astrometry and celestial mechanics
Main articles: Astrometry and Celestial mechanics

Star cluster Pismis 24 with a nebula
One of the oldest fields in astronomy, and in all of science, is the measurement of the positions of celestial objects. Historically, accurate knowledge of the positions of the Sun, Moon, planets and stars has been essential in celestial navigation (the use of celestial objects to guide navigation) and in the making of calendars.

Careful measurement of the positions of the planets has led to a solid understanding of gravitational perturbations, and an ability to determine past and future positions of the planets with great accuracy, a field known as celestial mechanics. More recently the tracking of near-Earth objects will allow for predictions of close encounters or potential collisions of the Earth with those objects.[63]

The measurement of stellar parallax of nearby stars provides a fundamental baseline in the cosmic distance ladder that is used to measure the scale of the Universe. Parallax measurements of nearby stars provide an absolute baseline for the properties of more distant stars, as their properties can be compared. Measurements of the radial velocity and proper motion of stars allows astronomers to plot the movement of these systems through the Milky Way galaxy. Astrometric results are the basis used to calculate the distribution of speculated dark matter in the galaxy.[64]

During the 1990s, the measurement of the stellar wobble of nearby stars was used to detect large extrasolar planets orbiting those stars.[65]

Theoretical astronomy
Nucleosynthesis
Wpdms physics proton proton chain 1.svg
Stellar nucleosynthesis
Big Bang nucleosynthesis
Supernova nucleosynthesis
Cosmic ray spallation
Related topics
Astrophysics
Nuclear fusion
R-process
S-process
Nuclear fission
vte
Main article: Theoretical astronomy
Theoretical astronomers use several tools including analytical models and computational numerical simulations; each has its particular advantages. Analytical models of a process are generally better for giving broader insight into the heart of what is going on. Numerical models reveal the existence of phenomena and effects otherwise unobserved.[66][67]

Theorists in astronomy endeavor to create theoretical models and from the results predict observational consequences of those models. The observation of a phenomenon predicted by a model allows astronomers to select between several alternate or conflicting models as the one best able to describe the phenomena.

Theorists also try to generate or modify models to take into account new data. In the case of an inconsistency between the data and model's results, the general tendency is to try to make minimal modifications to the model so that it produces results that fit the data. In some cases, a large amount of inconsistent data over time may lead to total abandonment of a model.

Phenomena modeled by theoretical astronomers include: stellar dynamics and evolution; galaxy formation; large-scale distribution of matter in the Universe; origin of cosmic rays; general relativity and physical cosmology, including string cosmology and astroparticle physics. Astrophysical relativity serves as a tool to gauge the properties of large scale structures for which gravitation plays a significant role in physical phenomena investigated and as the basis for black hole (astro)physics and the study of gravitational waves.

Some widely accepted and studied theories and models in astronomy, now included in the Lambda-CDM model are the Big Bang, Cosmic inflation, dark matter, and fundamental theories of physics.

A few examples of this process:

Physical process	Experimental tool	Theoretical model	Explains/predicts
Gravitation	Radio telescopes	Self-gravitating system	Emergence of a star system
Nuclear fusion	Spectroscopy	Stellar evolution	How the stars shine and how metals formed
The Big Bang	Hubble Space Telescope, COBE	Expanding universe	Age of the Universe
Quantum fluctuations		Cosmic inflation	Flatness problem
Gravitational collapse	X-ray astronomy	General relativity	Black holes at the center of Andromeda galaxy
CNO cycle in stars			The dominant source of energy for massive star.
Dark matter and dark energy are the current leading topics in astronomy,[68] as their discovery and controversy originated during the study of the galaxies.

Specific subfields
Astrophysics
Astrophysics is the branch of astronomy that employs the principles of physics and chemistry "to ascertain the nature of the astronomical objects, rather than their positions or motions in space".[69][70] Among the objects studied are the Sun, other stars, galaxies, extrasolar planets, the interstellar medium and the cosmic microwave background.[71][72] Their emissions are examined across all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, and the properties examined include luminosity, density, temperature, and chemical composition. Because astrophysics is a very broad subject, astrophysicists typically apply many disciplines of physics, including mechanics, electromagnetism, statistical mechanics, thermodynamics, quantum mechanics, relativity, nuclear and particle physics, and atomic and molecular physics.

In practice, modern astronomical research often involves a substantial amount of work in the realms of theoretical and observational physics. Some areas of study for astrophysicists include their attempts to determine the properties of dark matter, dark energy, and black holes; whether or not time travel is possible, wormholes can form, or the multiverse exists; and the origin and ultimate fate of the universe.[71] Topics also studied by theoretical astrophysicists include Solar System formation and evolution; stellar dynamics and evolution; galaxy formation and evolution; magnetohydrodynamics; large-scale structure of matter in the universe; origin of cosmic rays; general relativity and physical cosmology, including string cosmology and astroparticle physics.

Astrochemistry
Astrochemistry is the study of the abundance and reactions of molecules in the Universe, and their interaction with radiation.[73] The discipline is an overlap of astronomy and chemistry. The word "astrochemistry" may be applied to both the Solar System and the interstellar medium. The study of the abundance of elements and isotope ratios in Solar System objects, such as meteorites, is also called cosmochemistry, while the study of interstellar atoms and molecules and their interaction with radiation is sometimes called molecular astrophysics. The formation, atomic and chemical composition, evolution and fate of molecular gas clouds is of special interest, because it is from these clouds that solar systems form.

Studies in this field contribute to the understanding of the formation of the Solar System, Earth's origin and geology, abiogenesis, and the origin of climate and oceans.

Astrobiology
Astrobiology is an interdisciplinary scientific field concerned with the origins, early evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe. Astrobiology considers the question of whether extraterrestrial life exists, and how humans can detect it if it does.[74] The term exobiology is similar.[75]

Astrobiology makes use of molecular biology, biophysics, biochemistry, chemistry, astronomy, physical cosmology, exoplanetology and geology to investigate the possibility of life on other worlds and help recognize biospheres that might be different from that on Earth.[76] The origin and early evolution of life is an inseparable part of the discipline of astrobiology.[77] Astrobiology concerns itself with interpretation of existing scientific data, and although speculation is entertained to give context, astrobiology concerns itself primarily with hypotheses that fit firmly into existing scientific theories.

This interdisciplinary field encompasses research on the origin of planetary systems, origins of organic compounds in space, rock-water-carbon interactions, abiogenesis on Earth, planetary habitability, research on biosignatures for life detection, and studies on the potential for life to adapt to challenges on Earth and in outer space.[78][79][80]

Physical cosmology
Nature timeline
This box: viewtalkedit
-13 —–-12 —–-11 —–-10 —–-9 —–-8 —–-7 —–-6 —–-5 —–-4 —–-3 —–-2 —–-1 —–0 —
Reionization
Matter-dominated
era
accelerated expansion
water
Single-celled life
photosynthesis
Multicellular
life
Vertebrates
Dark Ages
?Universe (-13.80)?Earliest stars?Earliest galaxy?Earliest quasar/sbh?Omega Centauri?Andromeda Galaxy?Milky Way spirals?Alpha Centauri?Solar System?Earliest life?Earliest oxygen?Atmospheric oxygen?Sexual reproduction?Earliest plants?Cambrian explosion?Earliest mammals?Earliest apes
L
i
f
e
Axis scale: billion years
The image above contains clickable links(See also: Human timeline, and Life timeline.)
Main article: Physical cosmology
Cosmology (from the Greek ??sµ?? (kosmos) "world, universe" and ????? (logos) "word, study" or literally "logic") could be considered the study of the Universe as a whole.


Hubble Extreme Deep Field
Observations of the large-scale structure of the Universe, a branch known as physical cosmology, have provided a deep understanding of the formation and evolution of the cosmos. Fundamental to modern cosmology is the well-accepted theory of the big bang, wherein our Universe began at a single point in time, and thereafter expanded over the course of 13.8 billion years[81] to its present condition.[82] The concept of the big bang can be traced back to the discovery of the microwave background radiation in 1965.[82]

In the course of this expansion, the Universe underwent several evolutionary stages. In the very early moments, it is theorized that the Universe experienced a very rapid cosmic inflation, which homogenized the starting conditions. Thereafter, nucleosynthesis produced the elemental abundance of the early Universe.[82] (See also nucleocosmochronology.)

When the first neutral atoms formed from a sea of primordial ions, space became transparent to radiation, releasing the energy viewed today as the microwave background radiation. The expanding Universe then underwent a Dark Age due to the lack of stellar energy sources.[83]

A hierarchical structure of matter began to form from minute variations in the mass density of space. Matter accumulated in the densest regions, forming clouds of gas and the earliest stars, the Population III stars. These massive stars triggered the reionization process and are believed to have created many of the heavy elements in the early Universe, which, through nuclear decay, create lighter elements, allowing the cycle of nucleosynthesis to continue longer.[84]

Gravitational aggregations clustered into filaments, leaving voids in the gaps. Gradually, organizations of gas and dust merged to form the first primitive galaxies. Over time, these pulled in more matter, and were often organized into groups and clusters of galaxies, then into larger-scale superclusters.[85]

Various fields of physics are crucial to studying the universe. Interdisciplinary studies involve the fields of quantum mechanics, particle physics, plasma physics, condensed matter physics, statistical mechanics, optics, and nuclear physics.

Fundamental to the structure of the Universe is the existence of dark matter and dark energy. These are now thought to be its dominant components, forming 96% of the mass of the Universe. For this reason, much effort is expended in trying to understand the physics of these components.[86]

Extragalactic astronomy

This image shows several blue, loop-shaped objects that are multiple images of the same galaxy, duplicated by the gravitational lens effect of the cluster of yellow galaxies near the middle of the photograph. The lens is produced by the cluster's gravitational field that bends light to magnify and distort the image of a more distant object.
Main article: Extragalactic astronomy
The study of objects outside our galaxy is a branch of astronomy concerned with the formation and evolution of Galaxies, their morphology (description) and classification, the observation of active galaxies, and at a larger scale, the groups and clusters of galaxies. Finally, the latter is important for the understanding of the large-scale structure of the cosmos.

Most galaxies are organized into distinct shapes that allow for classification schemes. They are commonly divided into spiral, elliptical and Irregular galaxies.[87]

As the name suggests, an elliptical galaxy has the cross-sectional shape of an ellipse. The stars move along random orbits with no preferred direction. These galaxies contain little or no interstellar dust, few star-forming regions, and generally older stars. Elliptical galaxies are more commonly found at the core of galactic clusters, and may have been formed through mergers of large galaxies.

A spiral galaxy is organized into a flat, rotating disk, usually with a prominent bulge or bar at the center, and trailing bright arms that spiral outward. The arms are dusty regions of star formation within which massive young stars produce a blue tint. Spiral galaxies are typically surrounded by a halo of older stars. Both the Milky Way and one of our nearest galaxy neighbors, the Andromeda Galaxy, are spiral galaxies.

Irregular galaxies are chaotic in appearance, and are neither spiral nor elliptical. About a quarter of all galaxies are irregular, and the peculiar shapes of such galaxies may be the result of gravitational interaction.

An active galaxy is a formation that emits a significant amount of its energy from a source other than its stars, dust and gas. It is powered by a compact region at the core, thought to be a super-massive black hole that is emitting radiation from in-falling material.

A radio galaxy is an active galaxy that is very luminous in the radio portion of the spectrum, and is emitting immense plumes or lobes of gas. Active galaxies that emit shorter frequency, high-energy radiation include Seyfert galaxies, Quasars, and Blazars. Quasars are believed to be the most consistently luminous objects in the known universe.[88]

The large-scale structure of the cosmos is represented by groups and clusters of galaxies. This structure is organized into a hierarchy of groupings, with the largest being the superclusters. The collective matter is formed into filaments and walls, leaving large voids between.[89]

Galactic astronomy

Observed structure of the Milky Way's spiral arms
Main article: Galactic astronomy
The Solar System orbits within the Milky Way, a barred spiral galaxy that is a prominent member of the Local Group of galaxies. It is a rotating mass of gas, dust, stars and other objects, held together by mutual gravitational attraction. As the Earth is located within the dusty outer arms, there are large portions of the Milky Way that are obscured from view.

In the center of the Milky Way is the core, a bar-shaped bulge with what is believed to be a supermassive black hole at its center. This is surrounded by four primary arms that spiral from the core. This is a region of active star formation that contains many younger, population I stars. The disk is surrounded by a spheroid halo of older, population II stars, as well as relatively dense concentrations of stars known as globular clusters.[90]

Between the stars lies the interstellar medium, a region of sparse matter. In the densest regions, molecular clouds of molecular hydrogen and other elements create star-forming regions. These begin as a compact pre-stellar core or dark nebulae, which concentrate and collapse (in volumes determined by the Jeans length) to form compact protostars.[91]

As the more massive stars appear, they transform the cloud into an H II region (ionized atomic hydrogen) of glowing gas and plasma. The stellar wind and supernova explosions from these stars eventually cause the cloud to disperse, often leaving behind one or more young open clusters of stars. These clusters gradually disperse, and the stars join the population of the Milky Way.[92]

Kinematic studies of matter in the Milky Way and other galaxies have demonstrated that there is more mass than can be accounted for by visible matter. A dark matter halo appears to dominate the mass, although the nature of this dark matter remains undetermined.[93]

Stellar astronomy

Mz 3, often referred to as the Ant planetary nebula. Ejecting gas from the dying central star shows symmetrical patterns unlike the chaotic patterns of ordinary explosions.
Main article: Star
The study of stars and stellar evolution is fundamental to our understanding of the Universe. The astrophysics of stars has been determined through observation and theoretical understanding; and from computer simulations of the interior.[94] Star formation occurs in dense regions of dust and gas, known as giant molecular clouds. When destabilized, cloud fragments can collapse under the influence of gravity, to form a protostar. A sufficiently dense, and hot, core region will trigger nuclear fusion, thus creating a main-sequence star.[91]

Almost all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were created inside the cores of stars.[94]

The characteristics of the resulting star depend primarily upon its starting mass. The more massive the star, the greater its luminosity, and the more rapidly it fuses its hydrogen fuel into helium in its core. Over time, this hydrogen fuel is completely converted into helium, and the star begins to evolve. The fusion of helium requires a higher core temperature. A star with a high enough core temperature will push its outer layers outward while increasing its core density. The resulting red giant formed by the expanding outer layers enjoys a brief life span, before the helium fuel in the core is in turn consumed. Very massive stars can also undergo a series of evolutionary phases, as they fuse increasingly heavier elements.[95]

The final fate of the star depends on its mass, with stars of mass greater than about eight times the Sun becoming core collapse supernovae;[96] while smaller stars blow off their outer layers and leave behind the inert core in the form of a white dwarf. The ejection of the outer layers forms a planetary nebula.[97] The remnant of a supernova is a dense neutron star, or, if the stellar mass was at least three times that of the Sun, a black hole.[98] Closely orbiting binary stars can follow more complex evolutionary paths, such as mass transfer onto a white dwarf companion that can potentially cause a supernova.[99] Planetary nebulae and supernovae distribute the "metals" produced in the star by fusion to the interstellar medium; without them, all new stars (and their planetary systems) would be formed from hydrogen and helium alone.[100]

See also: Solar astronomy
Solar astronomy

An ultraviolet image of the Sun's active photosphere as viewed by the TRACE space telescope. NASA photo

Solar observatory Lomnický štít (Slovakia) built in 1962
Main article: Sun
See also: Solar telescope
At a distance of about eight light-minutes, the most frequently studied star is the Sun, a typical main-sequence dwarf star of stellar class G2 V, and about 4.6 billion years (Gyr) old. The Sun is not considered a variable star, but it does undergo periodic changes in activity known as the sunspot cycle. This is an 11-year oscillation in sunspot number. Sunspots are regions of lower-than- average temperatures that are associated with intense magnetic activity.[101]

The Sun has steadily increased in luminosity by 40% since it first became a main-sequence star. The Sun has also undergone periodic changes in luminosity that can have a significant impact on the Earth.[102] The Maunder minimum, for example, is believed to have caused the Little Ice Age phenomenon during the Middle Ages.[103]

The visible outer surface of the Sun is called the photosphere. Above this layer is a thin region known as the chromosphere. This is surrounded by a transition region of rapidly increasing temperatures, and finally by the super-heated corona.

At the center of the Sun is the core region, a volume of sufficient temperature and pressure for nuclear fusion to occur. Above the core is the radiation zone, where the plasma conveys the energy flux by means of radiation. Above that is the convection zone where the gas material transports energy primarily through physical displacement of the gas known as convection. It is believed that the movement of mass within the convection zone creates the magnetic activity that generates sunspots.[101]

A solar wind of plasma particles constantly streams outward from the Sun until, at the outermost limit of the Solar System, it reaches the heliopause. As the solar wind passes the Earth, it interacts with the Earth's magnetic field (magnetosphere) and deflects the solar wind, but traps some creating the Van Allen radiation belts that envelop the Earth. The aurora are created when solar wind particles are guided by the magnetic flux lines into the Earth's polar regions where the lines the descend into the atmosphere.[104]

Planetary science

The black spot at the top is a dust devil climbing a crater wall on Mars. This moving, swirling column of Martian atmosphere (comparable to a terrestrial tornado) created the long, dark streak.
Main articles: Planetary science and Planetary geology
Planetary science is the study of the assemblage of planets, moons, dwarf planets, comets, asteroids, and other bodies orbiting the Sun, as well as extrasolar planets. The Solar System has been relatively well-studied, initially through telescopes and then later by spacecraft. This has provided a good overall understanding of the formation and evolution of the Sun's planetary system, although many new discoveries are still being made.[105]

The Solar System is subdivided into the inner planets, the asteroid belt, and the outer planets. The inner terrestrial planets consist of Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. The outer gas giant planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.[106] Beyond Neptune lies the Kuiper belt, and finally the Oort Cloud, which may extend as far as a light-year.

The planets were formed 4.6 billion years ago in the protoplanetary disk that surrounded the early Sun. Through a process that included gravitational attraction, collision, and accretion, the disk formed clumps of matter that, with time, became protoplanets. The radiation pressure of the solar wind then expelled most of the unaccreted matter, and only those planets with sufficient mass retained their gaseous atmosphere. The planets continued to sweep up, or eject, the remaining matter during a period of intense bombardment, evidenced by the many impact craters on the Moon. During this period, some of the protoplanets may have collided and one such collision may have formed the Moon.[107]

Once a planet reaches sufficient mass, the materials of different densities segregate within, during planetary differentiation. This process can form a stony or metallic core, surrounded by a mantle and an outer crust. The core may include solid and liquid regions, and some planetary cores generate their own magnetic field, which can protect their atmospheres from solar wind stripping.[108]

A planet or moon's interior heat is produced from the collisions that created the body, by the decay of radioactive materials (e.g. uranium, thorium, and 26Al), or tidal heating caused by interactions with other bodies. Some planets and moons accumulate enough heat to drive geologic processes such as volcanism and tectonics. Those that accumulate or retain an atmosphere can also undergo surface erosion from wind or water. Smaller bodies, without tidal heating, cool more quickly; and their geological activity ceases with the exception of impact cratering.[109]

Interdisciplinary studies
Astronomy and astrophysics have developed significant interdisciplinary links with other major scientific fields. Archaeoastronomy is the study of ancient or traditional astronomies in their cultural context, utilizing archaeological and anthropological evidence. Astrobiology is the study of the advent and evolution of biological systems in the Universe, with particular emphasis on the possibility of non-terrestrial life. Astrostatistics is the application of statistics to astrophysics to the analysis of vast amount of observational astrophysical data.

The study of chemicals found in space, including their formation, interaction and destruction, is called astrochemistry. These substances are usually found in molecular clouds, although they may also appear in low temperature stars, brown dwarfs and planets. Cosmochemistry is the study of the chemicals found within the Solar System, including the origins of the elements and variations in the isotope ratios. Both of these fields represent an overlap of the disciplines of astronomy and chemistry. As "forensic astronomy", finally, methods from astronomy have been used to solve problems of law and history.

Amateur astronomy

Amateur astronomers can build their own equipment, and hold star parties and gatherings, such as Stellafane.
Astronomy is one of the sciences to which amateurs can contribute the most.[110]

Main article: Amateur astronomy
Collectively, amateur astronomers observe a variety of celestial objects and phenomena sometimes with equipment that they build themselves. Common targets of amateur astronomers include the Sun, the Moon, planets, stars, comets, meteor showers, and a variety of deep-sky objects such as star clusters, galaxies, and nebulae. Astronomy clubs are located throughout the world and many have programs to help their members set up and complete observational programs including those to observe all the objects in the Messier (110 objects) or Herschel 400 catalogues of points of interest in the night sky. One branch of amateur astronomy, amateur astrophotography, involves the taking of photos of the night sky. Many amateurs like to specialize in the observation of particular objects, types of objects, or types of events which interest them.[111][112]

Most amateurs work at visible wavelengths, but a small minority experiment with wavelengths outside the visible spectrum. This includes the use of infrared filters on conventional telescopes, and also the use of radio telescopes. The pioneer of amateur radio astronomy was Karl Jansky, who started observing the sky at radio wavelengths in the 1930s. A number of amateur astronomers use either homemade telescopes or use radio telescopes which were originally built for astronomy research but which are now available to amateurs (e.g. the One-Mile Telescope).[113][114]

Amateur astronomers continue to make scientific contributions to the field of astronomy and it is one of the few scientific disciplines where amateurs can still make significant contributions. Amateurs can make occultation measurements that are used to refine the orbits of minor planets. They can also discover comets, and perform regular observations of variable stars. Improvements in digital technology have allowed amateurs to make impressive advances in the field of astrophotography.[115][116][117]

Unsolved problems in astronomy
Main article: List of unsolved problems in astronomy
Although the scientific discipline of astronomy has made tremendous strides in understanding the nature of the Universe and its contents, there remain some important unanswered questions. Answers to these may require the construction of new ground- and space-based instruments, and possibly new developments in theoretical and experimental physics.

What is the origin of the stellar mass spectrum? That is, why do astronomers observe the same distribution of stellar masses—the initial mass function—apparently regardless of the initial conditions?[118] A deeper understanding of the formation of stars and planets is needed.
Is there other life in the Universe? Especially, is there other intelligent life? If so, what is the explanation for the Fermi paradox? The existence of life elsewhere has important scientific and philosophical implications.[119][120] Is the Solar System normal or atypical?
What is the nature of dark matter and dark energy? These dominate the evolution and fate of the cosmos, yet their true nature remains unknown.[121]
What will be the ultimate fate of the universe?[122]
How did the first galaxies form?[123] How did supermassive black holes form?[124]
What is creating the ultra-high-energy cosmic rays?[125]
Why is the abundance of lithium in the cosmos four times lower than predicted by the standard Big Bang model?[126]
What really happens beyond the event horizon?[127]
See also
Main articles: Outline of astronomy and Glossary of astronomy
icon	
Book: Astronomy
Airmass
Astronomical acronyms
Astronomical instruments
Cosmogony
International Year of Astronomy
List of astronomy acronyms
List of Russian astronomers and astrophysicists
Outline of space science
Science tourism
Space exploration
Starlight
Stellar collision
Universe: The Infinite Frontier (television series)
References
 Unsöld, Albrecht; Baschek, Bodo (2001). Classical Astronomy and the Solar System – Introduction. p. 1.
 Unsöld, Albrecht; Baschek, Bodo (2001). Classical Astronomy and the Solar System. pp. 6–9.
 http://www.sydneyobservatory.com.au/[permanent dead link] Official Web Site of the Sydney Observatory
 http://oaq.epn.edu.ec/ Official Web Site of one of the oldest Observatories in South America, the Quito Astronomical Observatory
 Losev A., (2012), 'Astronomy' or 'astrology': a brief history of an apparent confusion, Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 42–46 .
 Unsöld, Albrecht; Baschek, Bodo (2001). The New Cosmos: An Introduction to Astronomy and Astrophysics. Translated by Brewer, W.D. Berlin, New York: Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-67877-9.
 Scharringhausen, B. "Curious About Astronomy: What is the difference between astronomy and astrophysics?". Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Odenwald, Sten. "Archive of Astronomy Questions and Answers: What is the difference between astronomy and astrophysics?". astronomycafe.net. The Astronomy Cafe. Archived from the original on 8 July 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2007.
 "Penn State Erie-School of Science-Astronomy and Astrophysics". Archived from the original on 1 November 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2007.
 "Merriam-Webster Online". Results for "astronomy". Archived from the original on 17 June 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2007.
 "Merriam-Webster Online". Results for "astrophysics". Retrieved 20 June 2007.
 Shu, F.H. (1983). The Physical Universe. Mill Valley, California: University Science Books. ISBN 978-0-935702-05-7.
 Forbes, 1909
 DeWitt, Richard (2010). "The Ptolemaic System". Worldviews: An Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science. Chichester, England: Wiley. p. 113. ISBN 978-1-4051-9563-8.
 Aaboe, A. (1974). "Scientific Astronomy in Antiquity". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. 276 (1257): 21–42. Bibcode:1974RSPTA.276...21A. doi:10.1098/rsta.1974.0007. JSTOR 74272.
 "Eclipses and the Saros". NASA. Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 28 October 2007.
 Krafft, Fritz (2009). "Astronomy". In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.). Brill's New Pauly.
 Berrgren, J.L.; Nathan Sidoli (May 2007). "Aristarchus's On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and the Moon: Greek and Arabic Texts". Archive for History of Exact Sciences. 61 (3): 213–54. doi:10.1007/s00407-006-0118-4.
 "Hipparchus of Rhodes". School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 28 October 2007.
 Thurston, H. (1996). Early Astronomy. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-387-94822-5.
 Marchant, Jo (2006). "In search of lost time". Nature. 444 (7119): 534–38. Bibcode:2006Natur.444..534M. doi:10.1038/444534a. PMID 17136067.
 Hannam, James. God's philosophers: how the medieval world laid the foundations of modern science. Icon Books Ltd, 2009, 180
 Kennedy, Edward S. (1962). "Review: The Observatory in Islam and Its Place in the General History of the Observatory by Aydin Sayili". Isis. 53 (2): 237–39. doi:10.1086/349558.
 Micheau, Françoise. Rashed, Roshdi; Morelon, Régis (eds.). "The Scientific Institutions in the Medieval Near East". Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science. 3: 992–93.
 Nas, Peter J (1993). Urban Symbolism. Brill Academic Publishers. p. 350. ISBN 978-90-04-09855-8.
 Kepple, George Robert; Glen W. Sanner (1998). The Night Sky Observer's Guide. 1. Willmann-Bell, Inc. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-943396-58-3.
 Pingree, D. "ABU MA?ŠAR – Encyclopaedia Iranica". www.iranicaonline.org. Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 11 February 2017.
 Richard Lemay, Abu Ma'shar and Latin Aristotelianism in the Twelfth Century, The Recovery of Aristotle's Natural Philosophy through Iranian Astrology, 1962.
 Freely, John (30 March 2015). Light from the East: How the Science of Medieval Islam Helped to Shape the Western World. I.B.Tauris. p. 179. ISBN 978-1-78453-138-6.
 Berry, Arthur (1961). A Short History of Astronomy From Earliest Times Through the 19th Century. New York: Dover Publications, Inc. ISBN 978-0-486-20210-5.
 Hoskin, Michael, ed. (1999). The Cambridge Concise History of Astronomy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-57600-0.
 McKissack, Pat; McKissack, Frederick (1995). The royal kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay: life in medieval Africa. H. Holt. ISBN 978-0-8050-4259-7.
 Clark, Stuart; Carrington, Damian (2002). "Eclipse brings claim of medieval African observatory". New Scientist. Retrieved 3 February 2010.
 "Cosmic Africa explores Africa's astronomy". Science in Africa. Archived from the original on 3 December 2003. Retrieved 3 February 2002.
 Holbrook, Jarita C.; Medupe, R. Thebe; Urama, Johnson O. (2008). African Cultural Astronomy. Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-6638-2.
 "Africans studied astronomy in medieval times". The Royal Society. 30 January 2006. Archived from the original on 9 June 2008. Retrieved 3 February 2010.
 Stenger, Richard "Star sheds light on African 'Stonehenge'". CNN. 5 December 2002. Archived from the original on 12 May 2011.. CNN. 5 December 2002. Retrieved on 30 December 2011.
 J.L. Heilbron, The Sun in the Church: Cathedrals as Solar Observatories (1999) p.3
 Forbes, 1909, pp. 49–58
 Forbes, 1909, pp. 58–64
 Chambers, Robert (1864) Chambers Book of Days
 Forbes, 1909, pp. 79–81
 Forbes, 1909, pp. 147–50
 Forbes, 1909, pp. 74–76
 Belkora, Leila (2003). Minding the heavens: the story of our discovery of the Milky Way. CRC Press. pp. 1–14. ISBN 978-0-7503-0730-7.
 Castelvecchi, Davide; Witze, Witze (11 February 2016). "Einstein's gravitational waves found at last". Nature News. doi:10.1038/nature.2016.19361. Retrieved 11 February 2016.
 B.P. Abbott (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Physical Review Letters. 116 (6): 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. PMID 26918975.
 "Electromagnetic Spectrum". NASA. Archived from the original on 5 September 2006. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Cox, A.N., ed. (2000). Allen's Astrophysical Quantities. New York: Springer-Verlag. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-387-98746-0.
 "In Search of Space". Picture of the Week. European Southern Observatory. Retrieved 5 August 2014.
 "Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer Mission". NASA University of California, Berkeley. 30 September 2014. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Majaess, D. (2013). Discovering protostars and their host clusters via WISE, ApSS, 344, 1 (VizieR catalog)
 Staff (11 September 2003). "Why infrared astronomy is a hot topic". ESA. Retrieved 11 August 2008.
 "Infrared Spectroscopy – An Overview". NASA California Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 5 October 2008. Retrieved 11 August 2008.
 Moore, P. (1997). Philip's Atlas of the Universe. Great Britain: George Philis Limited. ISBN 978-0-540-07465-5.
 Penston, Margaret J. (14 August 2002). "The electromagnetic spectrum". Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Gaisser, Thomas K. (1990). Cosmic Rays and Particle Physics. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-521-33931-5.
 Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (6): 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. PMID 26918975.
 Tammann, G.A.; Thielemann, F.K.; Trautmann, D. (2003). "Opening new windows in observing the Universe". Europhysics News. Archived from the original on 6 September 2012. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration; Abbott, B.P.; Abbott, R.; Abbott, T.D.; Abernathy, M. R.; Acernese, F.; Ackley, K.; Adams, C.; Adams, T. (15 June 2016). "GW151226: Observation of Gravitational Waves from a 22-Solar-Mass Binary Black Hole Coalescence". Physical Review Letters. 116 (24): 241103. arXiv:1606.04855. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116x1103A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.241103. PMID 27367379.
 "Planning for a bright tomorrow: Prospects for gravitational-wave astronomy with Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo". LIGO Scientific Collaboration. Retrieved 31 December 2015.
 Xing, Zhizhong; Zhou, Shun (2011). Neutrinos in Particle Physics, Astronomy and Cosmology. Springer. p. 313. ISBN 978-3-642-17560-2.
 Calvert, James B. (28 March 2003). "Celestial Mechanics". University of Denver. Archived from the original on 7 September 2006. Retrieved 21 August 2006.
 "Hall of Precision Astrometry". University of Virginia Department of Astronomy. Archived from the original on 26 August 2006. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Wolszczan, A.; Frail, D. A. (1992). "A planetary system around the millisecond pulsar PSR1257+12". Nature. 355 (6356): 145–47. Bibcode:1992Natur.355..145W. doi:10.1038/355145a0.
 Roth, H. (1932). "A Slowly Contracting or Expanding Fluid Sphere and its Stability". Physical Review. 39 (3): 525–29. Bibcode:1932PhRv...39..525R. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.39.525.
 Eddington, A.S. (1926). Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33708-3.
 "Dark matter". NASA. 2010. Archived from the original on 30 October 2009. Retrieved 2 November 2009. third paragraph, "There is currently much ongoing research by scientists attempting to discover exactly what this dark matter is"
 Keeler, James E. (November 1897), "The Importance of Astrophysical Research and the Relation of Astrophysics to the Other Physical Sciences", The Astrophysical Journal, 6 (4): 271–88, Bibcode:1897ApJ.....6..271K, doi:10.1086/140401, [Astrophysics] is closely allied on the one hand to astronomy, of which it may properly be classed as a branch, and on the other hand to chemistry and physics.… It seeks to ascertain the nature of the heavenly bodies, rather than their positions or motions in space—what they are, rather than where they are.… That which is perhaps most characteristic of astrophysics is the special prominence which it gives to the study of radiation.
 "astrophysics". Merriam-Webster, Incorporated. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011. Retrieved 22 May 2011.
 "Focus Areas – NASA Science". nasa.gov.
 "astronomy". Encyclopædia Britannica.
 "Astrochemistry". www.cfa.harvard.edu/. 15 July 2013. Archived from the original on 20 November 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2016.
 "About Astrobiology". NASA Astrobiology Institute. NASA. 21 January 2008. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008.
 Mirriam Webster Dictionary entry "Exobiology" (accessed 11 April 2013)
 Ward, P.D.; Brownlee, D. (2004). The life and death of planet Earth. New York: Owl Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-7512-0.
 "Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres". Journal: Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres. Retrieved 6 April 2015.
 "Release of the First Roadmap for European Astrobiology". European Science Foundation. Astrobiology Web. 29 March 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016.
 Corum, Jonathan (18 December 2015). "Mapping Saturn's Moons". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 December 2015.
 Cockell, Charles S. (4 October 2012). "How the search for aliens can help sustain life on Earth". CNN News. Retrieved 8 October 2012.
 "Cosmic Detectives". The European Space Agency (ESA). 2 April 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2013.
 Dodelson, Scott (2003). Modern cosmology. Academic Press. pp. 1–22. ISBN 978-0-12-219141-1.
 Hinshaw, Gary (13 July 2006). "Cosmology 101: The Study of the Universe". NASA WMAP. Archived from the original on 13 August 2006. Retrieved 10 August 2006.
 Dodelson, 2003, pp. 216–61
 "Galaxy Clusters and Large-Scale Structure". University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 10 October 2006. Retrieved 8 September 2006.
 Preuss, Paul. "Dark Energy Fills the Cosmos". U.S. Department of Energy, Berkeley Lab. Archived from the original on 11 August 2006. Retrieved 8 September 2006.
 Keel, Bill (1 August 2006). "Galaxy Classification". University of Alabama. Archived from the original on 1 September 2006. Retrieved 8 September 2006.
 "Active Galaxies and Quasars". NASA. Archived from the original on 31 August 2006. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Zeilik, Michael (2002). Astronomy: The Evolving Universe (8th ed.). Wiley. ISBN 978-0-521-80090-7.
 Ott, Thomas (24 August 2006). "The Galactic Centre". Max-Planck-Institut für extraterrestrische Physik. Archived from the original on 4 September 2006. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Smith, Michael David (2004). "Cloud formation, Evolution and Destruction". The Origin of Stars. Imperial College Press. pp. 53–86. ISBN 978-1-86094-501-4.
 Smith, Michael David (2004). "Massive stars". The Origin of Stars. Imperial College Press. pp. 185–99. ISBN 978-1-86094-501-4.
 Van den Bergh, Sidney (1999). "The Early History of Dark Matter". Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific. 111 (760): 657–60. arXiv:astro-ph/9904251. Bibcode:1999PASP..111..657V. doi:10.1086/316369.
 Harpaz, 1994, pp. 7–18
 Harpaz, 1994
 Harpaz, 1994, pp. 173–78
 Harpaz, 1994, pp. 111–18
 Audouze, Jean; Israel, Guy, eds. (1994). The Cambridge Atlas of Astronomy (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-43438-6.
 Harpaz, 1994, pp. 189–210
 Harpaz, 1994, pp. 245–56
 Johansson, Sverker (27 July 2003). "The Solar FAQ". Talk.Origins Archive. Archived from the original on 7 September 2006. Retrieved 11 August 2006.
 Lerner, K. Lee; Lerner, Brenda Wilmoth (2006). "Environmental issues : essential primary sources". Thomson Gale. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Pogge, Richard W. (1997). "The Once & Future Sun". New Vistas in Astronomy. Archived from the original (lecture notes) on 27 May 2005. Retrieved 3 February 2010.
 Stern, D.P.; Peredo, M. (28 September 2004). "The Exploration of the Earth's Magnetosphere". NASA. Archived from the original on 24 August 2006. Retrieved 22 August 2006.
 Bell III, J. F.; Campbell, B.A.; Robinson, M.S. (2004). Remote Sensing for the Earth Sciences: Manual of Remote Sensing (3rd ed.). John Wiley & Sons. Archived from the original on 11 August 2006. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
 Grayzeck, E.; Williams, D.R. (11 May 2006). "Lunar and Planetary Science". NASA. Archived from the original on 20 August 2006. Retrieved 21 August 2006.
 Montmerle, Thierry; Augereau, Jean-Charles; Chaussidon, Marc; et al. (2006). "Solar System Formation and Early Evolution: the First 100 Million Years". Earth, Moon, and Planets. 98 (1–4): 39–95. Bibcode:2006EM&P...98...39M. doi:10.1007/s11038-006-9087-5.
 Montmerle, 2006, pp. 87–90
 Beatty, J.K.; Petersen, C.C.; Chaikin, A., eds. (1999). The New Solar System. Cambridge press. p. 70edition = 4th. ISBN 978-0-521-64587-4.
 Mims III, Forrest M. (1999). "Amateur Science—Strong Tradition, Bright Future". Science. 284 (5411): 55–56. Bibcode:1999Sci...284...55M. doi:10.1126/science.284.5411.55. Astronomy has traditionally been among the most fertile fields for serious amateurs [...]
 "The American Meteor Society". Archived from the original on 22 August 2006. Retrieved 24 August 2006.
 Lodriguss, Jerry. "Catching the Light: Astrophotography". Archived from the original on 1 September 2006. Retrieved 24 August 2006.
 Ghigo, F. (7 February 2006). "Karl Jansky and the Discovery of Cosmic Radio Waves". National Radio Astronomy Observatory. Archived from the original on 31 August 2006. Retrieved 24 August 2006.
 "Cambridge Amateur Radio Astronomers". Retrieved 24 August 2006.
 "The International Occultation Timing Association". Archived from the original on 21 August 2006. Retrieved 24 August 2006.
 "Edgar Wilson Award". IAU Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. Archived from the original on 24 October 2010. Retrieved 24 October 2010.
 "American Association of Variable Star Observers". AAVSO. Archived from the original on 2 February 2010. Retrieved 3 February 2010.
 Kroupa, Pavel (2002). "The Initial Mass Function of Stars: Evidence for Uniformity in Variable Systems". Science. 295 (5552): 82–91. arXiv:astro-ph/0201098. Bibcode:2002Sci...295...82K. doi:10.1126/science.1067524. PMID 11778039.
 "Rare Earth: Complex Life Elsewhere in the Universe?". Astrobiology Magazine. 15 July 2002. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 12 August 2006.
 Sagan, Carl. "The Quest for Extraterrestrial Intelligence". Cosmic Search Magazine. Archived from the original on 18 August 2006. Retrieved 12 August 2006.
 "11 Physics Questions for the New Century". Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. Archived from the original on 3 February 2006. Retrieved 12 August 2006.
 Hinshaw, Gary (15 December 2005). "What is the Ultimate Fate of the Universe?". NASA WMAP. Archived from the original on 29 May 2007. Retrieved 28 May 2007.
 "FAQ – How did galaxies form?". NASA. Archived from the original on 16 December 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
 "Supermassive Black Hole". Swinburne University. Retrieved 28 July 2015.
 Hillas, A.M. (September 1984). "The Origin of Ultra-High-Energy Cosmic Rays". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 22: 425–44. Bibcode:1984ARA&A..22..425H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.22.090184.002233. This poses a challenge to these models, because [...]
 Howk, J. Christopher; Lehner, Nicolas; Fields, Brian D.; Mathews, Grant J. (6 September 2012). "Observation of interstellar lithium in the low-metallicity Small Magellanic Cloud". Nature. 489 (7414): 121–23. arXiv:1207.3081. Bibcode:2012Natur.489..121H. doi:10.1038/nature11407. PMID 22955622.
 Orwig, Jessica (15 December 2014). "What Happens When You Enter A Black Hole?". Business Insider International. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
Bibliography
Forbes, George (1909). History of Astronomy. London: Plain Label Books. ISBN 978-1-60303-159-2.
Harpaz, Amos (1994). Stellar Evolution. A K Peters, Ltd. ISBN 978-1-56881-012-6.
Unsöld, A.; Baschek, B. (2001). The New Cosmos: An Introduction to Astronomy and Astrophysics. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-67877-9.
External links
Astronomy
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Resources from Wikiversity
NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED) (NED-Distances)
International Year of Astronomy 2009 IYA2009 Main website
Cosmic Journey: A History of Scientific Cosmology from the American Institute of Physics
Southern Hemisphere Astronomy
Celestia Motherlode Educational site for Astronomical journeys through space
Kroto, Harry, Astrophysical Chemistry Lecture Series.
Core books and Core journals in Astronomy, from the Smithsonian/NASA Astrophysics Data System
A Journey with Fred Hoyle by Wickramasinghe, Chandra.
Astronomy books from the History of Science Collection at Linda Hall Library
vte
Astronomy
Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Glossary
Astronomy by	
Manner	
Amateur Observational Sidewalk
Celestial subject	
Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar
Method	
Radio Submillimetre Infrared (Far-infrared) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray Gamma-ray
Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Spherical Multi-messenger
Culture	
Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chechen (Nakh) Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Medieval Islamic Serbian folk astronomy Tibetan
Optical
telescopes	
List Category Extremely large telescope
Gran Telescopio Canarias Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope
Related topics	
Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astrophysics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astroparticle physics Photometry Physical cosmology List of astronomers French Muslim Russian Women
Portals	
Astronomy Cosmology Solar System Mars Jupiter Uranus Moon Physics Spaceflight Stars
Category Category Commons page Commons Portal Portal WikiProject WikiProject
vte
Major subfields of astronomy and astrophysics
Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astrometry Cosmochemistry Cosmology Extragalactic astronomy Galactic astronomy Orbital mechanics Physical cosmology Planetary geology Planetary science Solar astronomy Stellar astronomy
vte
Natural science
vte
The Solar System
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
Crab Nebula.jpgAstronomy portalIlc 9yr moll4096.pngCosmology portalEarth-moon.jpgSpace portal
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
GND: 4003311-9 HDS: 8255 LCCN: sh85009003 NARA: 10637421 NDL: 00572840 NKC: ph114088
Categories: AstronomyPhysical sciences
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikibooks
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikiversity
Wikivoyage
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
?????
???????
??????
?????
??????
?????
?????
??????
????
207 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 23 May 2019, at 19:53 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki



 This is a good article. Follow the link for more information. Page semi-protected
Black hole
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For other uses, see Black hole (disambiguation).
"Frozen star" redirects here. For the hypothetical object, see Frozen star (hypothetical star).
Blackness of space with black marked as center of donut of orange and red gases
The supermassive black hole at the core of supergiant elliptical galaxy Messier 87, with a mass ~7 billion times the Sun's,[1] as depicted in the first image released by the Event Horizon Telescope (10 April 2019).[2][3][4][5] Visible are the crescent-shaped emission ring and central shadow, which are gravitationally magnified views of the black hole's photon ring and the photon capture zone of its event horizon. The crescent shape arises from the black hole's rotation and relativistic beaming; the shadow is about 2.6 times the diameter of the event horizon.[3]
Part of a series of articles about
General relativity
Spacetime curvature schematic
{\displaystyle G_{\mu \nu }+\Lambda g_{\mu \nu }={8\pi G \over c^{4}}T_{\mu \nu }} G_{\mu \nu }+\Lambda g_{\mu \nu }={8\pi G \over c^{4}}T_{\mu \nu }
IntroductionHistory
Mathematical formulation
Tests
Fundamental concepts[show]
Phenomena[hide]
Gravitoelectromagnetism Kepler problem Gravity Gravitational field Gravity well Gravitational lensing Gravitational waves Gravitational redshift Redshift Blueshift Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Shapiro time delay Gravitational potential Gravitational compression Gravitational collapse Frame-dragging Geodetic effect Apparent horizon Event horizon Gravitational singularity Naked singularity Black hole White hole
Spacetime
Space Time Spacetime diagrams Minkowski spacetime Closed timelike curve (CTC) Wormhole Ellis wormhole
EquationsFormalisms
[show]
Solutions[show]
Scientists[show]
vte
A black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting gravitational acceleration so strong that nothing—no particles or even electromagnetic radiation such as light—can escape from it.[6] The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole.[7][8] The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon. Although the event horizon has an enormous effect on the fate and circumstances of an object crossing it, no locally detectable features appear to be observed.[9] In many ways, a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light.[10][11] Moreover, quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe.

Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace.[12] The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967 sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.

Black holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses (M?) may form. There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.

Despite its invisible interior, the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming some of the brightest objects in the universe. If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of the Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.

On 11 February 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced the first direct detection of gravitational waves, which also represented the first observation of a black hole merger.[13] As of December 2018, eleven gravitational wave events have been observed that originated from ten merging black holes (along with one binary neutron star merger).[14][15] On 10 April 2019, the first ever direct image of a black hole and its vicinity was published, following observations made by the Event Horizon Telescope in 2017 of the supermassive black hole in Messier 87's galactic centre.[3][16][17]

Schwarzschild black hole
Simulation of gravitational lensing by a black hole, which distorts the image of a galaxy in the background

Gas cloud being ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the Milky Way (observations from 2006, 2010 and 2013 are shown in blue, green and red, respectively).[18]

Contents
1	History
1.1	General relativity
1.1.1	Golden age
1.2	Etymology
2	Properties and structure
2.1	Physical properties
2.2	Event horizon
2.3	Singularity
2.4	Photon sphere
2.5	Ergosphere
2.6	Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)
3	Formation and evolution
3.1	Gravitational collapse
3.1.1	Primordial black holes and the Big Bang
3.2	High-energy collisions
3.3	Growth
3.4	Evaporation
4	Observational evidence
4.1	Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2	Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3	Accretion of matter
4.3.1	X-ray binaries
4.3.2	Galactic nuclei
4.4	Microlensing (proposed)
4.5	Alternatives
5	Open questions
5.1	Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2	Information loss paradox
5.3	Firewall paradox
6	See also
7	Notes
8	References
9	Further reading
10	External links
History

A simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.
The idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was briefly proposed by astronomical pioneer and English clergyman John Michell in a letter published in November 1784. Michell's simplistic calculations assumed that such a body might have the same density as the Sun, and concluded that such a body would form when a star's diameter exceeds the Sun's by a factor of 500, and the surface escape velocity exceeds the usual speed of light. Michell correctly noted that such supermassive but non-radiating bodies might be detectable through their gravitational effects on nearby visible bodies.[19][12][20] Scholars of the time were initially excited by the proposal that giant but invisible stars might be hiding in plain view, but enthusiasm dampened when the wavelike nature of light became apparent in the early nineteenth century.[21] If light were a wave rather than a "corpuscle", it became unclear what, if any, influence gravity would have on escaping light waves.[12][20] Modern relativity discredits Michell's notion of a light ray shooting directly from the surface of a supermassive star, being slowed down by the star's gravity, stopping, and then free-falling back to the star's surface.[22]

General relativity
See also: History of general relativity
In 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass.[23] A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties.[24][25] This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was a non-physical coordinate singularity.[26] Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because "a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere)."[27][28]

In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1.4 M?) has no stable solutions.[29] His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse.[30] They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star,[31] which is itself stable. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above another limit (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit) would collapse further for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes.[32] Their original calculations, based on the Pauli exclusion principle, gave it as 0.7 M?; subsequent consideration of strong force-mediated neutron-neutron repulsion raised the estimate to approximately 1.5 M? to 3.0 M?.[33] Observations of the neutron star merger GW170817, which is thought to have generated a black hole shortly afterward, have refined the TOV limit estimate to ~2.17 M?.[34][35][36][37][38]

Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called "frozen stars", because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it to the Schwarzschild radius.[39]

Golden age
In 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, "a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction".[40] This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.[41]

These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967,[42][43] which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars.[44] Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.[citation needed]

In this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.[45] Through the work of Werner Israel,[46] Brandon Carter,[47][48] and David Robinson[49] the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.[50]

At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose[51] and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically.[52]

Work by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics.[53] These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole.[54]

Etymology
John Michell used the term "dark star",[55] and in the early 20th century, physicists used the term "gravitationally collapsed object". Science writer Marcia Bartusiak traces the term "black hole" to physicist Robert H. Dicke, who in the early 1960s reportedly compared the phenomenon to the Black Hole of Calcutta, notorious as a prison where people entered but never left alive.[56]

The term "black hole" was used in print by Life and Science News magazines in 1963,[56] and by science journalist Ann Ewing in her article "'Black Holes' in Space", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science held in Cleveland, Ohio.[57][58]

In December 1967, a student reportedly suggested the phrase "black hole" at a lecture by John Wheeler;[57] Wheeler adopted the term for its brevity and "advertising value", and it quickly caught on,[59] leading some to credit Wheeler with coining the phrase.[60]

Properties and structure

A simple illustration of a non-spinning black hole
The no-hair conjecture postulates that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum; the black hole is otherwise featureless. If the conjecture is true, any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable from one another. The degree to which the conjecture is true for real black holes under the laws of modern physics, is currently an unsolved problem.[50]

These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole.[61][clarification needed] Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.[clarification needed]

When an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm.[62] This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.[63][64]


Gravitational time dilation around a black hole
Physical properties
The simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916.[23] According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric.[65] This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole "sucking in everything" in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.[66]

Solutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.[67]

While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge Q and the total angular momentum J are expected to satisfy

{\displaystyle Q^{2}+\left({\tfrac {J}{M}}\right)^{2}\leq M^{2}\,} Q^{2}+\left({\tfrac {J}{M}}\right)^{2}\leq M^{2}\,
for a black hole of mass M. Black holes with the minimum possible mass satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed unphysical. The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter.[7] This is supported by numerical simulations.[68]

Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a universal feature of compact astrophysical objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105[69] appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value. That uncharged limit is[70]

{\displaystyle J\leq {\frac {GM^{2}}{c}},} {\displaystyle J\leq {\frac {GM^{2}}{c}},}
allowing definition of a dimensionless spin parameter such that[70]

{\displaystyle 0\leq {\frac {cJ}{GM^{2}}}\leq 1.} {\displaystyle 0\leq {\frac {cJ}{GM^{2}}}\leq 1.}[70][Note 1]
Black hole classifications
Class	Approx.
mass	Approx.
radius
Supermassive black hole	105–1010 MSun	0.001–400 AU
Intermediate-mass black hole	103 MSun	103 km ˜ REarth
Stellar black hole	10 MSun	30 km
Micro black hole	up to MMoon	up to 0.1 mm
Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum, J. The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is proportional to the mass, M, through

{\displaystyle r_{\mathrm {s} }={\frac {2GM}{c^{2}}}\approx 2.95\,{\frac {M}{M_{\mathrm {Sun} }}}~\mathrm {km,} } {\displaystyle r_{\mathrm {s} }={\frac {2GM}{c^{2}}}\approx 2.95\,{\frac {M}{M_{\mathrm {Sun} }}}~\mathrm {km,} }
where rs is the Schwarzschild radius and MSun is the mass of the Sun.[72] For a black hole with nonzero spin and/or electric charge, the radius is smaller,[Note 2] until an extremal black hole could have an event horizon close to[73]

{\displaystyle r_{\mathrm {+} }={\frac {GM}{c^{2}}}.} {\displaystyle r_{\mathrm {+} }={\frac {GM}{c^{2}}}.}
Event horizon
Main article: Event horizon

Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light.

Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away.[Note 3]

Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape.
The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred.[75]

As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass.[76] At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.[77]

To a distant observer, clocks near a black hole would appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole.[78] Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it.[79] At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the view point of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift.[80] Eventually, the falling object fades away until it can no longer be seen. Typically this process happens very rapidly with an object disappearing from view within less than a second.[81]

On the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; in classical general relativity, it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations, due to Einstein's equivalence principle.[82][83]

The shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical.[Note 4][86] For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the event horizon is oblate.[87]

Singularity
Main article: Gravitational singularity
At the center of a black hole, as described by general relativity, may lie a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite.[88] For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation.[89] In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution.[90] The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.[91]

Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit.[92] When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the "noodle effect".[93]

In the case of a charged (Reissner–Nordström) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole.[94] The possibility of traveling to another universe is, however, only theoretical since any perturbation would destroy this possibility.[95] It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which leads to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox.[96] It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.[97]

The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory.[98] This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.[99][100]

Photon sphere
Main article: Photon sphere
The photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.[101]

While light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.[101]

Ergosphere
Main article: Ergosphere

The ergosphere is a pumpkin-shaped region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.[102]
Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly "drag" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.[103]

The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole's oblate spheroid event horizon and a pumpkin-shaped outer boundary, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator. The outer boundary is sometimes called the ergosurface.[102]

Objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered. This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow.[104] A variation of the Penrose process in the presence of strong magnetic fields, the Blandford–Znajek process is considered a likely mechanism for the enormous luminosity and relativistic jets of quasars and other active galactic nuclei.

Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)
Main article: Innermost stable circular orbit
In Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole.[105] The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:

{\displaystyle r_{isco}=3\,r_{s}={\frac {6\,GM}{c^{2}}},} {\displaystyle r_{isco}=3\,r_{s}={\frac {6\,GM}{c^{2}}},}
and decreases with increasing black hole spin for particles orbiting in the same direction as the spin.[106]

Formation and evolution
Given the bizarre character of black holes, it was long questioned whether such objects could actually exist in nature or whether they were merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius.[107] This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects,[108] and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.[citation needed]

File:BBH gravitational lensing of gw150914.webm
Simulation of two black holes colliding
Penrose demonstrated that once an event horizon forms, general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that a singularity will form within.[51] Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see "Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems").[clarification needed] The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research.[109] Conventional black holes are formed by gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but they can also in theory be formed by other processes.[110][111]

Gravitational collapse
Main article: Gravitational collapse
Gravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little "fuel" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.[112] The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. Which type forms depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away. Such explosions and pulsations lead to planetary nebula.[113] This mass can be substantially less than the original star. Remnants exceeding 5 M? are produced by stars that were over 20 M? before the collapse.[112]

If the mass of the remnant exceeds about 3–4 M? (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit[32]), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.[112]


Artist's impression of supermassive black hole seed[114]
The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 M?. These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies.[115] It has further been suggested that supermassive black holes with typical masses of ~105 M? could have formed from the direct collapse of gas clouds in the young universe.[110] Some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe.[110]

While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.[116]

Primordial black holes and the Big Bang
Gravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the Big Bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. High density alone is not enough to allow black hole formation since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to have formed in such a dense medium, there must have been initial density perturbations that could then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the scale of these fluctuations. Various models predict the creation of primordial black holes ranging in size from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses.[111]

Despite the early universe being extremely dense—far denser than is usually required to form a black hole—it did not re-collapse into a black hole during the Big Bang. Models for gravitational collapse of objects of relatively constant size, such as stars, do not necessarily apply in the same way to rapidly expanding space such as the Big Bang.[117]

High-energy collisions

A simulated event in the CMS detector: a collision in which a micro black hole may be created
Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments.[118] This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass (mP=vh c/G ˜ 1.2×1019 GeV/c2 ˜ 2.2×10-8 kg), where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity.[119] This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as 1 TeV/c2.[120] This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists.[121] Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10-25 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.[122]

Growth
Once a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings. This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown.[115] A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters.[123] Black holes can also merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. This is thought to have been important, especially in the early growth of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the aggregation of many smaller objects.[115] The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.[124][125]

Evaporation
Main article: Hawking radiation
In 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation at a temperature ? c3/(8 p G M kB);[54] this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches.[126] If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles.[54] The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.[127]

A stellar black hole of 1 M? has a Hawking temperature of 62 nanokelvins.[128] This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrinking.[129] To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.[130]

If a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10-24 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/c2 would take less than 10-88 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate this is the case.[131][132]

The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes.[133] NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.[134]

If black holes evaporate via Hawking radiation, a solar mass black hole will evaporate (beginning once the temperature of the cosmic microwave background drops below that of the black hole) over a period of 1064 years.[135] A supermassive black hole with a mass of 1011 (100 billion) M? will evaporate in around 2×10100 years.[136] Some monster black holes in the universe are predicted to continue to grow up to perhaps 1014 M? during the collapse of superclusters of galaxies. Even these would evaporate over a timescale of up to 10106 years.[135]

Observational evidence
Ambox current red.svg
This section needs to be updated. In particular: the EHT team has revealed its results on 10 April 2019. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (April 2019)
Messier 87 galaxy – home of the first imaged black hole

context

closeup

super massive black hole
By their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings.[137]

On 10 April 2019 an image was released of a black hole, which is seen in magnified fashion because the light paths near the event horizon are highly bent. The dark shadow in the middle results from light paths absorbed by the black hole. The image is in false color, as the detected light halo in this image is not in the visible spectrum, but radio waves.


This artist's impression depicts the paths of photons in the vicinity of a black hole. The gravitational bending and capture of light by the event horizon is the cause of the shadow captured by the Event Horizon Telescope.
The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), run by MIT's Haystack Observatory, is an active program that directly observes the immediate environment of the event horizon of black holes, such as the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. In April 2017, EHT began observation of the black hole in the center of Messier 87.[138] "In all, eight radio observatories on six mountains and four continents observed the galaxy in Virgo on and off for 10 days in April 2017" to provide the data yielding the image two years later in April 2019.[139] After 2 years of data processing, EHT released the first direct image of a black hole, specifically the supermassive black hole that lies in the center of the aforementioned galaxy.[140][141] What is visible is not the black hole, which shows as black; gases at the edge, the event horizon, show as orange or red, defining the black hole.[142] Astrophysicist Feryal Özel, team member, commented about this image and the theory of general relativity: Just because this first image upholds general relativity "doesn’t mean general relativity is completely fine,”.[142]

Prior to this, in 2015, the EHT detected magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, and even discerned some of their properties. The existence of magnetic fields had been predicted by theoretical studies of black holes.[143][144]


Predicted appearance of non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter, such as has been proposed[145] as a model for Sagittarius A*. The asymmetry is due to the Doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the very strong gravitational attraction of the hole.
Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
On 14 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful direct observation of gravitational waves.[13][146] The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses.[13][147] This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two objects prior to the merger was just 350 km (or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses). The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.[13]

More importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole.[148] From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger.[149] The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere, however it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.[148]

The observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.[150]

On 15 June 2016, a second detection of a gravitational wave event from colliding black holes was announced,[151] and other gravitational wave events have since been observed.[15]

Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
The proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole.[152] Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a 2.6 million M? object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.[153] Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to refine the calculations of the mass to 4.3 million M? and a radius of less than 0.002 light years for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars.[152] The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume.[153] Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.[154]

Accretion of matter
See also: Accretion disc

Black hole with corona, X-ray source (artist's concept).[155]
Due to conservation of angular momentum,[156] gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc-like structure around the object. Artists' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space body hiding the part of the disc just behind it, but in reality gravitational lensing would greatly distort the image of the accretion disk.[157]


Predicted view from outside the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion disc
Within such a disc, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall further inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.[158]


Blurring of X-rays near black hole (NuSTAR; 12 August 2014).[155]
When the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole, the gas in the inner accretion disc orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disc to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known; up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation.[158] (In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy.) In many cases, accretion discs are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood, in part due to insufficient data.[159]

As such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes.[160] Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion.[160] It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.[161]

In November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.[162][163]

X-ray binaries
See also: X-ray binary
File:A star is consumed by a black hole.ogv
A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.
File:RXTE Detects Heartbeat Of Smallest Black Hole Candidate.ogv
This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.

A Chandra X-Ray Observatory image of Cygnus X-1, which was the first strong black hole candidate discovered
X-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides an opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.[160]

If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.[160]

The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton,[164] Louise Webster and Paul Murdin[165] in 1972.[166][167] Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole. Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients. In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cygni.[160]

Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
The faintness of the accretion disc of an X-ray binary during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow of mass entering a mode called an advection-dominated accretion flow (ADAF). In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away. If this model is correct, then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon,[168] since if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface, it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface,[clarification needed] an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state.[158]

Quasi-periodic oscillations
Main article: Quasi-periodic oscillations
The X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.[169]

Galactic nuclei
See also: Active galactic nucleus

Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.
Astronomers use the term "active galaxy" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.[170][171]


Detection of unusually bright X-Ray flare from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy on 5 January 2015.[172]
Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.[173]

It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole.[174] The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself.[175]


Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[176]
Microlensing (proposed)
Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole.[177] One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.[177]

Alternatives
See also: Exotic star
The evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound.[160] A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars,[178] and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars.[179] Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars.[180] These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.[160]

Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a 108 M? black hole is comparable to that of water).[160] Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.[160]

The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts.[181] For example, in the fuzzball model based on string theory, the individual states of a black hole solution do not generally have an event horizon or singularity, but for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.[182]

A few theoretical objects have been conjectured to match observations of astronomical black hole candidates identically or near-identically, but which function via a different mechanism. These include the gravastar, the black star,[183] and the dark-energy star.[184]

Open questions
Entropy and thermodynamics
Further information: Black hole thermodynamics
S = 
1
/
4
 
c3k
/
Gh
 A
The formula for the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (h). In Planck units, this reduces to S = 
A
/
4
.
In 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions[Note 5] that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge.[185] This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of an isolated system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.[186]

The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.[186]

One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.[187]

Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy.[188] Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.[189]

Information loss paradox
Main article: Black hole information paradox
Question, Web Fundamentals.svg	Unsolved problem in physics:
Is physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)
Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside, but represented on the event horizon in accordance with the holographic principle. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.[190]

The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne–Hawking–Preskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity, which has to do with the conservation of probability. It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy.[191] Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.[192]

Firewall paradox
Main article: Firewall (physics)
According to quantum field theory in curved spacetime, a single emission of Hawking radiation involves two mutually entangled particles. The outgoing particle escapes and is emitted as a quantum of Hawking radiation; the infalling particle is swallowed by the black hole. Assume a black hole formed a finite time in the past and will fully evaporate away in some finite time in the future. Then, it will only emit a finite amount of information encoded within its Hawking radiation. Assume that at time {\displaystyle t} t, more than half of the information had already been emitted. According to widely accepted research by physicists like Don Page[193][194] and Leonard Susskind, an outgoing particle emitted at time {\displaystyle t} t must be entangled with all the Hawking radiation the black hole has previously emitted. This creates a paradox: a principle called "monogamy of entanglement" requires that, like any quantum system, the outgoing particle cannot be fully entangled with two independent systems at the same time; yet here the outgoing particle appears to be entangled with both the infalling particle and, independently, with past Hawking radiation.[195]

In order to resolve the paradox, physicists may eventually be forced to give up one of three time-tested theories: Einstein's equivalence principle, unitarity, or existing quantum field theory. One possible solution, which violates the equivalence principle, is that a "firewall" destroys incoming particles at the event horizon.[196] A 2016 analysis of LIGO data shows tentative signs of echoes caused by a fuzzy event horizon; such echoes may be possible in firewall or fuzzball theories but should not occur in classical general relativity. Over the next two years, additional LIGO data should establish whether the echoes were just random noise, or whether they are instead evidence of a violation of classical general relativity.[197]

See also
Binary black hole
Black brane
Black hole complementarity
Black Hole Initiative
Black holes in fiction
Black hole starship
Black string
BTZ black hole
General relativity
Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
List of black holes
List of nearest black holes
Outline of black holes
Sonic black hole, also Dumb hole
Stellar black hole
Supermassive black holes
Susskind-Hawking battle
Timeline of black hole physics
White hole
Wormhole
Notes
 The value of cJ/GM2 can exceed 1 for objects other than black holes. The largest value known for a neutron star is = 0.4, and commonly used equations of state would limit that value to < 0.7.[71]
 The (outer) event horizon radius scales as: {\displaystyle M+{\sqrt {M^{2}-{(J/M)}^{2}-Q^{2}}}.} {\displaystyle M+{\sqrt {M^{2}-{(J/M)}^{2}-Q^{2}}}.}
 The set of possible paths, or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines (in this diagram the light cone is represented by the V-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines), is tilted in this way in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates (the diagram is a "cartoon" version of an Eddington–Finkelstein coordinate diagram), but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way, for example in Schwarzschild coordinates they simply narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon, and in Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates the light cones do not change shape or orientation at all.[74]
 This is true only for 4-dimensional spacetimes. In higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible.[84][85]
 In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition.
References
 Oldham, L. J.; Auger, M. W. (March 2016). "Galaxy structure from multiple tracers – II. M87 from parsec to megaparsec scales". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. 457 (1): 421–439. arXiv:1601.01323. Bibcode:2016MNRAS.457..421O. doi:10.1093/mnras/stv2982.
 Overbye, Dennis (10 April 2019). "Black Hole Picture Revealed for the First Time – Astronomers at last have captured an image of the darkest entities in the cosmos – Comments". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 April 2019.
 Event Horizon Telescope, The (2019). "First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results. I. The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole". The Astrophysical Journal. 87 (1): L1. Bibcode:2019ApJ...875L...1E. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab0ec7.
 Landau, Elizabeth (10 April 2019). "Black Hole Image Makes History". NASA. Retrieved 10 April 2019.
 "The woman behind first black hole image". bbc.co.uk. BBC News. 11 April 2019.
 Wald 1984, pp. 299–300
 Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". In Iyer, B. R.; Bhawal, B. (eds.). Black Holes, Gravitational Radiation and the Universe. Springer. pp. 69–86. arXiv:gr-qc/9710068. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-0934-7. ISBN 978-9401709347.
 Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015. Retrieved 8 June 2015.
 "Introduction to Black Holes". Retrieved 26 September 2017.
 Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 978-0-521-45506-0. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016.
 Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics. 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2013.
 Montgomery, Colin; Orchiston, Wayne; Whittingham, Ian (2009). "Michell, Laplace and the origin of the black hole concept". Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage. 12 (2): 90–96. Bibcode:2009JAHH...12...90M.
 Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (6): 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. PMID 26918975.
 Siegel, Ethan. "Five Surprising Truths About Black Holes From LIGO". Forbes. Retrieved 12 April 2019.
 "Detection of gravitational waves". LIGO. Retrieved 9 April 2018.
 Bouman, Katherine L.; Johnson, Michael D.; Zoran, Daniel; Fish, Vincent L.; Doeleman, Sheperd S.; Freeman, William T. (2016). "Computational Imaging for VLBI Image Reconstruction". 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 913–922. arXiv:1512.01413. doi:10.1109/CVPR.2016.105. hdl:1721.1/103077. ISBN 978-1-4673-8851-1.
 Gardiner, Aidan (12 April 2018). "When a Black Hole Finally Reveals Itself, It Helps to Have Our Very Own Cosmic Reporter – Astronomers announced Wednesday that they had captured the first image of a black hole. The Times's Dennis Overbye answers readers' questions". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 April 2019.
 "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Archived from the original on 21 July 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2013.
 Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose. By the Rev. John Michell, B. D. F. R. S. In a Letter to Henry Cavendish, Esq. F. R. S. and A. S". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. 74: 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576.
 Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124
 Slayter, Elizabeth M.; Slayter, Henry S. (1992). Light and Electron Microscopy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33948-3. Archived from the original on 30 November 2017.
 Crass, Institute of Astronomy – Design by D.R. Wilkins and S.J. "Light escaping from black holes". www.ast.cam.ac.uk. Retrieved 10 March 2018.
 Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 7: 189–196. Bibcode:1916SPAW.......189S.
Translation: Antoci, S.; Loinger, A. (1999). "On the gravitational field of a mass point according to Einstein's theory". arXiv:physics/9905030. and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld einer Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 18: 424–434. Bibcode:1916skpa.conf..424S.
Translation: Antoci, S. (1999). "On the gravitational field of a sphere of incompressible fluid according to Einstein's theory". arXiv:physics/9912033.
 Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam. 19 (1): 197–215. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2013.
 Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, Jean; Kox, A. J. (eds.). Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7.
 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 May 2009.
 Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-521-33708-3. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016.
 Thorne, Kip S.; Hawking, Stephen (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy. W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 134–135. ISBN 978-0-393-31276-8. Retrieved 12 April 2019. The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."
 Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 978-81-7371-035-3. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016.
 Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics. 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686.
 Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 978-1-56881-012-6. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016.
 Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review. 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374.
 Bombaci, I. (1996). "The Maximum Mass of a Neutron Star". Astronomy and Astrophysics. 305: 871–877. Bibcode:1996A&A...305..871B.
 Cho, A. (16 February 2018). "A weight limit emerges for neutron stars". Science. 359 (6377): 724–725. Bibcode:2018Sci...359..724C. doi:10.1126/science.359.6377.724. PMID 29449468.
 Margalit, B.; Metzger, B. D. (1 December 2017). "Constraining the Maximum Mass of Neutron Stars from Multi-messenger Observations of GW170817". The Astrophysical Journal. 850 (2): L19. arXiv:1710.05938. Bibcode:2017ApJ...850L..19M. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa991c.
 Shibata, M.; Fujibayashi, S.; Hotokezaka, K.; Kiuchi, K.; Kyutoku, K.; Sekiguchi, Y.; Tanaka, M. (22 December 2017). "Modeling GW170817 based on numerical relativity and its implications". Physical Review D. 96 (12): 123012. arXiv:1710.07579. Bibcode:2017PhRvD..96l3012S. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.96.123012.
 Ruiz, M.; Shapiro, S. L.; Tsokaros, A. (11 January 2018). "GW170817, general relativistic magnetohydrodynamic simulations, and the neutron star maximum mass". Physical Review D. 97 (2): 021501. arXiv:1711.00473. Bibcode:2018PhRvD..97b1501R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.97.021501. PMC 6036631. PMID 30003183.
 Rezzolla, L.; Most, E. R.; Weih, L. R. (9 January 2018). "Using Gravitational-wave Observations and Quasi-universal Relations to Constrain the Maximum Mass of Neutron Stars". Astrophysical Journal. 852 (2): L25. arXiv:1711.00314. Bibcode:2018ApJ...852L..25R. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aaa401.
 Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today. 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2011.
 Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review. 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965.
 Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review. 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743.
 Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature. 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0.
 Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature. 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0.
 Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405.
 Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics. 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351.
 Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review. 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776.
 Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters. 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331.
 Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254.
 Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters. 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905.
 Heusler, M. (2012). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity. 15 (7): 7. arXiv:1205.6112. Bibcode:2012LRR....15....7C. doi:10.12942/lrr-2012-7. PMC 5255892. PMID 28179837.
 Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters. 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57.
 Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics. 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197.
 Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics. 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR 0334798. Zbl 1125.83309.
 Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature. 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0.
 Popova, Maria (27 June 2016). "Mapping the Heavens: How Cosmology Shaped Our Understanding of the Universe and the Strange Story of How the Term "Black Hole" Was Born". brainpickings.org. Retrieved 12 April 2019.
 "MIT's Marcia Bartusiak On Understanding Our Place In The Universe". www.wbur.org. Retrieved 12 April 2019.
 Siegfried, Tom (23 December 2013). "50 years later, it's hard to say who named black holes". Science News. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017. It seems that the "black hole" label was also bandied about in January 1964 in Cleveland at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Science News Letter reporter Ann Ewing reported from that meeting, describing how an intense gravitational field could cause a star to collapse in on itself. "Such a star then forms a 'black hole' in the universe," Ewing wrote
 Brown, Emma (3 August 2010). "Ann E. Ewing, journalist first reported black holes". Boston.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017.
 "Pioneering Physicist John Wheeler Dies at 96". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 28 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
 Overbye, Dennis (14 April 2008). "John A. Wheeler, Physicist Who Coined the Term 'Black Hole,' Is Dead at 96". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
 Carroll 2004, p. 253
 Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8.
 Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 24 March 2009.
 Preskill, J. (21 October 1994). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2008.
 Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix B
 Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-495-11352-2. Archived from the original on 10 August 2016.
 Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 978-0-471-87316-7.
 Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity. 5 (1): 2002–1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. PMC 5256073. PMID 28179859.
 McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal. 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457.
 Abbott, B. P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (1 June 2017). "GW170104: Observation of a 50-Solar-Mass Binary Black Hole Coalescence at Redshift 0.2". Physical Review Letters. 118 (22): 221101. arXiv:1706.01812. Bibcode:2017PhRvL.118v1101A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.221101. PMID 28621973.
 Abbott, B. P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration & Virgo Collaboration) (16 October 2017). "GW170817: Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Neutron Star Inspiral". Physical Review Letters. 119 (16): 161101. arXiv:1710.05832. Bibcode:2017PhRvL.119p1101A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.161101. PMID 29099225.
 Wald 1984, pp. 124–125
 Saa, Alberto; Santarelli, Raphael (18 July 2011). "Destroying a near-extremal Kerr–Newman black hole". Physical Review D. 84 (2): 027501. arXiv:1105.3950. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84b7501S. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.027501.
 Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848
 Wheeler 2007, p. 179
 Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3
 "Singularities and Black Holes > Lightcones and Causal Structure". plato.stanford.edu. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 11 March 2018.
 Carroll 2004, p. 217
 Carroll 2004, p. 218
 "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Archived from the original on 23 April 2009. Retrieved 26 March 2009.
 "What happens to you if you fall into a black holes". math.ucr.edu. John Baez. Retrieved 11 March 2018.
 Carroll 2004, p. 222
 "Watch: Three Ways an Astronaut Could Fall Into a Black Hole". 1 February 2014. Retrieved 13 March 2018.
 Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity. 11 (6): 6. arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. PMC 5253845. PMID 28163607.
 Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios (ed.). Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity (PDF). Physics of Black Holes. Lecture Notes in Physics. 769. pp. 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. Bibcode:2009LNP...769.....P. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0.
 hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3
 Shapiro, Stuart (1995). "Toroidal black holes and topological censorship". Physical Review D. 52 (12): 6982–6987. Bibcode:1995PhRvD..52.6982S. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.52.6982.
 Carroll 2004, p. 205
 Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265
 Carroll 2004, p. 252
 "Sizes of Black Holes? How Big is a Black Hole?". Sky & Telescope. 22 July 2014. Retrieved 9 October 2018.
 Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia. 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012.
 Wheeler 2007, p. 182
 Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266
 Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World. 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. doi:10.1088/2058-7058/9/1/26. Archived from the original on 17 August 2014.
 Carroll 2004, p. 266
 Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D. 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796.
 Wald 1984, p. 212
 Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 7 April 2009. Retrieved 26 March 2009.
 Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Archived from the original on 28 March 2009. Retrieved 26 March 2009.
 Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D. 84 (6): 063008. arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008.
 Visser, Matt (2007). "The Kerr spacetime: A brief introduction". arXiv:0706.0622 [gr-qc]., page 35, Fig. 3
 Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6
 Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7
 Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973
 Bardeen, J. M. (1972). "Rotating black holes: locally nonrotating frames, energy extraction, and scalar synchrotron radiation". The Astrophysical Journal. 178: 347–370. Bibcode:1972ApJ...178..347B. doi:10.1086/151796.
 Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics. 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902.
 Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. (eds.). The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. Bibcode:2007arXiv0706.1109K. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6.
 Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A. 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467.
 Pacucci, F.; Ferrara, A.; Grazian, A.; Fiore, F.; Giallongo, E. (2016). "First Identification of Direct Collapse Black Hole Candidates in the Early Universe in CANDELS/GOODS-S". Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 459 (2): 1432. arXiv:1603.08522. Bibcode:2016MNRAS.459.1432P. doi:10.1093/mnras/stw725.
 Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. (eds.). Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. pp. astro–ph/0511743. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. Bibcode:2005astro.ph.11743C. ISBN 978-4-946443-94-7.
 Carroll 2004, Section 5.8
 Griffiths, Martin (2012). Planetary Nebulae and How to Observe Them (illustrated ed.). Springer Science & Business Media. p. 11. ISBN 978-1-4614-1781-1. Archived from the original on 3 December 2016. Extract of page 11
 "Artist's impression of supermassive black hole seed". Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
 Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. (eds.). Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies – Across the Range of Masses. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies – Across the Range of Masses. 238. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. Bibcode:2007IAUS..238...51R. doi:10.1017/S1743921307004681. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6.
 Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation. 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 May 2013.
 Philip Gibbs. "Is the Big Bang a black hole?". John Baez. Retrieved 16 March 2018.
 Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D. 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010.
 Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D. 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004.
 Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B. 429 (3–4): 263–272. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3.
 LHC Safety Assessment Group (2008). "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). Journal of Physics G Nuclear Physics. CERN. 35 (11): 115004. arXiv:0806.3414. Bibcode:2008JPhG...35k5004E. doi:10.1088/0954-3899/35/11/115004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 April 2010.
 Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online. 4: 1010. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013.
 Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters. 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41.
 Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature. 428 (6984): 724–726. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124.
 O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal. 637 (2): 937–951. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446.
 Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics. 7 (1): 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203.
 Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6
 Siegel, Ethan (2017). "Ask Ethan: Do Black Holes Grow Faster Than They Evaporate?". Forbes ("Starts With A Bang" blog). Retrieved 17 March 2018.
 Sivaram, C. (2001). "Black hole Hawking radiation may never be observed!". General Relativity and Gravitation. 33 (2): 175–181. Bibcode:2001GReGr..33..175S. doi:10.1023/A:1002753400430.
 "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 12 December 2010.
 Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D. 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009.
 Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics. 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14.
 Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal. 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758.
 Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Archived from the original on 31 August 2008. Retrieved 16 September 2008.
 Frautschi, S. (1982). "Entropy in an Expanding Universe". Science. 217 (4560): 593–599. Bibcode:1982Sci...217..593F. doi:10.1126/science.217.4560.593. PMID 17817517. See page 596: table 1 and section "black hole decay" and previous sentence on that page.
 Particle emission rates from a black hole: Massless particles from an uncharged, nonrotating hole, Don N. Page, Physical Review D 13 (1976), pp. 198–206. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.13.198. See in particular equation (27).
 "Black Holes | Science Mission Directorate". NASA. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
 "April 2017 Observations". Event Horizon Telescope. Retrieved 11 April 2019.
 Overbye, Dennis (10 April 2019). "Darkness Visible, Finally: Astronomers Capture First Ever Image of a Black Hole". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 April 2019.
 AP (10 April 2019). "Astronomers Reveal the First Picture of a Black Hole". The New York Times (video). Retrieved 11 April 2019.
 Doeleman, Shep (4 April 2016). "The Event Horizon Telescope: Imaging and Time-Resolving a Black Hole". Physics @ Berkeley. Event occurs at 46:50. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016.
 Grossman, Lisa; Conover, Emily (10 April 2019). "The first picture of a black hole opens a new era of astrophysics". Science News. Retrieved 11 April 2019.
 Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (4 December 2015). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science. 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. PMID 26785487.
 "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Archived from the original on 31 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016.
 O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, "Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori", Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8
 Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 February 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2016.
 Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration & Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". Physical Review Letters. 116 (24): 241102. arXiv:1602.03840. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116x1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.241102. PMID 27367378.
 Cardoso, V.; Franzin, E.; Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. 116 (17): 171101. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116q1101C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.171101. PMID 27176511.
 Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration & Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Archived from the original on 15 February 2016. Retrieved 12 February 2016.
 Abbott, B. P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration & Virgo Collaboration) (2016). "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016.
 Overbye, Dennis (15 June 2016). "Scientists Hear a Second Chirp From Colliding Black Holes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 June 2016. Retrieved 15 June 2016.
 Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal. 692 (2): 1075–1109. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075.
 Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper-Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal. 509 (2): 678–686. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528.
 Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal. 701 (2): 1357–1366. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357.
 "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Archived from the original on 13 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014.
 "Researchers clarify dynamics of black hole rotational energy". Retrieved 17 September 2018.
 Marck, Jean-Alain (1 March 1996). "Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole". Classical and Quantum Gravity. 13 (3): 393–402. arXiv:gr-qc/9505010. Bibcode:1996CQGra..13..393M. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/13/3/007. ISSN 0264-9381.
 McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. (eds.). Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. p. 157. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. Bibcode:2006csxs.book..157M. ISBN 978-0-521-82659-4. section 4.1.5.
 "What powers a black hole's mighty jets?". Science | AAAS. 19 November 2014. Retrieved 19 March 2018.
 Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes" (PDF). Classical and Quantum Gravity. 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. Bibcode:1999CQGra..16A...3C. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301.
 Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM-Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X-Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal. 649 (2): 730–752. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579.
 information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org -GB. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 7 March 2016.
 Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (1 December 2011). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal. 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67.
 Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature. 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0.
 Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1 – a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature. 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0.
 Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008. Retrieved 11 March 2008.
 Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters. 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4.
 Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews. 51 (10–12): 733–751. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002.
 "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 1 April 2008. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
 Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 978-0-691-01151-6.
 Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 978-0-521-59740-1.
 Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 – NASA's Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way's Black Hole". NASA. Archived from the original on 6 January 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2015.
 Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound – The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics. 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053.
 King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-s Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters. 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143.
 Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters. 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838.
 "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2012.
 Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation. 42 (9): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2.
 Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society. 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x.
 Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159.
 Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B. 616 (1–2): 1–7. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034.
 Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik. 15 (1–2): 129–148. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175.
 Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports. 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001.
 Choi, Charles Q. (2018). "Black Hole Pretenders Could Really Be Bizarre Quantum Stars". Scientific American. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
 Ball, Philip (31 March 2005). "Black holes 'do not exist'". Nature News. doi:10.1038/news050328-8. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
 Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters. 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344.
 Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity. 4 (1): 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. PMC 5253844. PMID 28163633.
 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. (ed.). Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Basics and Highlights in Fundamental Physics. Subnuclear series. 37. pp. 72–100. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. Bibcode:2001bhfp.conf...72T. doi:10.1142/9789812811585_0005. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8.
 Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B. 379 (1–4): 99–104. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0.
 Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Physics of Black Holes. Physics of Black Holes. Lecture Notes in Physics. 769. pp. 89–123. arXiv:0807.4520. Bibcode:2009LNP...769...89C. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0.
 Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 14 March 2009.
 Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. Bibcode:1995hep.th....8151G.
 Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. Bibcode:2012Prama..79.1059M. doi:10.1007/s12043-012-0417-z.
 Page, Don N. (1993). "Information in black hole radiation". Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (23): 3743–3746. arXiv:hep-th/9306083. Bibcode:1993PhRvL..71.3743P. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.267.174. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.3743. PMID 10055062.
 Page, Don N. (1993). "Average entropy of a subsystem". Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (9): 1291–1294. arXiv:gr-qc/9305007. Bibcode:1993PhRvL..71.1291P. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.339.7694. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.1291. PMID 10055503.
 Merali, Zeeya (4 April 2013). "Astrophysics: Fire in the hole!". Nature. pp. 20–23. Bibcode:2013Natur.496...20M. doi:10.1038/496020a. Archived from the original on 8 December 2016. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
 Ouellette, Jennifer (21 December 2012). "Black Hole Firewalls Confound Theoretical Physicists". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 29 October 2013. Originally published Archived 3 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine in Quanta, 21 December 2012.
 Merali, Zeeya (2016). "LIGO black hole echoes hint at general-relativity breakdown". Nature. 540. doi:10.1038/nature.2016.21135.
Further reading
Popular reading

Ferguson, Kitty (1991). Black Holes in Space-Time. Watts Franklin. ISBN 978-0-531-12524-3.
Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. Bantam Books, Inc. ISBN 978-0-553-38016-3.
Hawking, Stephen; Penrose, Roger (1996). The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-03791-2.
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09505-9.
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe. Cambridge U Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81405-8.
Pickover, Clifford (1998). Black Holes: A Traveler's Guide. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-0-471-19704-1.
Thorne, Kip S. (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps. Norton, W. W. & Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-31276-8.
Wheeler, J. Craig (2007). Cosmic Catastrophes (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85714-7.
University textbooks and monographs

Carroll, Sean M. (2004). Spacetime and Geometry. Addison Wesley. ISBN 978-0-8053-8732-2., the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll's website.
Carter, B. (1973). "Black hole equilibrium states". In DeWitt, B. S.; DeWitt, C. (eds.). Black Holes.
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1999). Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-850370-5.
Frolov, V. P.; Novikov, I. D. (1998). "Black hole physics".
Frolov, Valeri P.; Zelnikov, Andrei (2011). Introduction to Black Hole Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969229-3. Zbl 1234.83001.
Hawking, S. W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). Large Scale Structure of space time. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-09906-6.
Melia, Fulvio (2007). The Galactic Supermassive Black Hole. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13129-0.
Misner, Charles; Thorne, Kip S.; Wheeler, John (1973). Gravitation. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 978-0-7167-0344-0.
Taylor, Edwin F.; Wheeler, John Archibald (2000). Exploring Black Holes. Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 978-0-201-38423-9.
Wald, Robert M. (1984). General Relativity. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87033-5.
Wald, Robert M. (1992). Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black Holes. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87029-8.
Black holes Teviet Creighton, Richard H. Price Scholarpedia 3(1):4277. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4277
Review papers

Gallo, Elena; Marolf, Donald (2009). "Resource Letter BH-2: Black Holes". American Journal of Physics. 77 (4): 294–307. arXiv:0806.2316. Bibcode:2009AmJPh..77..294G. doi:10.1119/1.3056569.
Hughes, Scott A. (2005). "Trust but verify: The case for astrophysical black holes". arXiv:hep-ph/0511217. Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.
External links
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
Data from Wikidata
Black Holes on In Our Time at the BBC
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Singularities and Black Holes" by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.
Black Holes: Gravity's Relentless Pull – Interactive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science Institute
ESA's Black Hole Visualization
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes
"Schwarzschild Geometry"
Hubble site
Videos
16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black hole
Movie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck Institute
Nature.com 2015-04-20 3D simulations of colliding black holes
Computer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGO
Two Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914)
vte
Black holes
Types	
Schwarzschild Rotating Charged Virtual Kugelblitz Primordial Planck particle
BH LMC.png
Size	
Micro Extremal Electron Stellar Microquasar Intermediate-mass Supermassive Active galactic nucleus Quasar Blazar
Formation	
Stellar evolution Gravitational collapse Neutron star Related links Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit White dwarf Related links Supernova Related links Hypernova Gamma-ray burst Binary black hole
Properties	
Gravitational singularity Ring singularity Theorems Event horizon Photon sphere Innermost stable circular orbit Ergosphere Penrose process Blandford–Znajek process Accretion disk Hawking radiation Gravitational lens Bondi accretion M–sigma relation Quasi-periodic oscillation Thermodynamics Immirzi parameter Schwarzschild radius Spaghettification
Issues	
Black hole complementarity Information paradox Cosmic censorship ER=EPR Final parsec problem Firewall (physics) Holographic principle No-hair theorem
Metrics	
Schwarzschild (Derivation) Kerr Reissner–Nordström Kerr–Newman Hayward
Alternatives	
Nonsingular black hole models Black star Dark star Dark-energy star Gravastar Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object Q star Fuzzball
Analogs	
Optical black hole Sonic black hole
Lists	
Black holes Most massive Nearest Quasars Microquasars
Related	
Black Hole Initiative Black hole starship Compact star Exotic star Quark star Preon star Gamma-ray burst progenitors Gravity well Hypercompact stellar system Membrane paradigm Naked singularity Quasi-star Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer Timeline of black hole physics White hole Wormhole
Category Category Commons page Commons
vte
Relativity
vte
String theory
Crab Nebula.jpgAstronomy portalIlc 9yr moll4096.pngCosmology portalHe1523a.jpgStar portalStylised atom with three Bohr model orbits and stylised nucleus.svgPhysics portalNewton's reflecting telescope.jpgHistory of science portalEarth-moon.jpgSpace portalHandicapped Accessible sign.svgDisability portalDelta-shield.svgStar Trek portal
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BNE: XX528239 BNF: cb11933630s (data) GND: 4053793-6 LCCN: sh85014574 NDL: 00561056 SUDOC: 027253430
Categories: Black holesGalaxiesTheory of relativity
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote

Languages
?????
???????
??????
?????
??????
?????
?????
??????
????
137 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 21 May 2019, at 16:15 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
